my lords , i should like to thank the minister for setting out the government 's position on what is , by any stretch of the imagination , a contentious bill . " i don 't know what you mean by ' glory ' , alice said . humpty dumpty smiled contemptuously . of course you don 't - till i tell you . i meant ' there 's a nice knock-down argument for you ! ' but ' glory ' doesn't mean ' a nice knock-down argument ' , alice objected . when i use a word , humpty dumpty said , in rather a scornful tone , it means just what i choose it to mean - neither more nor less " . i would suggest that if we substitute the word " marriage " for " glory " we get somewhere very close to the essence of today 's debate . as humpty dumpty might have said : " there 's a nice knock-down argument for you . marriage means just what i choose it to mean - neither more nor less " . if we move away from lewis carroll 's alice and back through the looking glass , we find ourselves in a world where an ill considered bill seeks to overturn centuries of tradition , heedless of public opinion and the views of religious leaders and blind to the laws of unintended consequences . it seeks to alter totally the concept of marriage as we have always known it , it seeks to divide a nation with an argument that hides behind the concept of equality when in reality it is about sameness , and it stands on its head all considerations of electoral mandate . i am conscious that around 90 speakers await their turn to speak today and tomorrow so i will deal only very briefly with the essential elements of the arguments against the bill but take , in turn , four things : the concept of the rule of the majority ; the impact of the bill on society ; the flawed process that it has undergone so far ; and , last but by no means least , the question of whether it is proper or appropriate to vote the bill down at second reading . first , i refer to the question of the extent to which a civilised society should accede to the wishes or the desires of a very small minority in its midst . in the debate on the humble address on 9 may this year , an impassioned reference was made to the plight of homosexuals in uganda and in other repressive regimes . this seemed to suggest that , if we were to defeat the bill , this country could quickly regress to a state something approaching that in uganda and elsewhere where homophobia is prevalent . nothing could be more fanciful and nothing could be further from the truth . like many other members of your lordships ' house , i have , for many years , championed the extension and the protection of minority rights , including homosexual rights and equality , and i have seen and applauded this country 's change of attitude towards homosexuality , from thinly veiled intolerance 50 years or so ago to a position of understanding and acceptance today . with the introduction of civil partnerships , we have seen the legal rights of homosexual couples put on a par with those in a conventional marriage , with all the financial benefits available to both groupings . indeed , those in a homosexual civil partnership are significantly better off in that respect than family members who live together without the benefits of such a partnership . doubtless , we shall hear more of that as the debate progresses - more about the two sisters living together or the elderly parent and the unmarried daughter in the same household . all those are of course unable to enjoy the same financial benefits available to those in civil partnerships . in that respect , homosexual equality has outstripped equality for those in family relationships . however , this part of the argument is much more about the lengths to which a society should go in order to embrace the demands from very small minorities . the utilitarian approach of jeremy bentham - the greatest good for the greatest number , where a simple majority carries the day - was challenged first by john stuart mill and then by other theological and jurisprudential writers in the 19th century . very sensibly , it has been moderated over the years to a point where any society wishing to be thought of as civilised , tolerant and mature is judged by the degree to which it can accept minority views , even when those views fail to accord absolutely to the norms and views of the majority . however , there must come a point when , provided full equality for all under the law is guaranteed - this , i suggest , is perhaps the nub of this argument - the majority view should prevail , especially when the minority is tiny and the overwhelming majority is affronted . it is all a question of balance , wisely , and not least sensitively , applied . the present danger of redefining marriage could well turn out to be counterproductive because tolerance can be overstretched . look to contemporary france for an example . the similarities with this country are numerous . france has much the same population as our own , is still coming to terms with a revised role in the world , has an old and enduring national religion , has financial problems , and its leadership is questioned . same-sex marriage has recently been forced through the french parliamentary process , with the result that mass demonstrations , and occasionally riots , have taken place in major cities in that country . worse , the incidence of serious homophobic violence has markedly increased . i do not foresee violent street demonstrations in this country but i fear that the bill , should it become law , could well create such opposition to homosexuals in general that the climate of tolerance and acceptance in this country that we have all championed , supported and seen flourish over the years could well be set back by decades - certainly for a long time . let me move on . in headline form only , let me pose a question or two . what is the impact of the proposed legislation on society ? a change in the law would herald uncertainty in a number of areas , rather than certainty , and i will touch only briefly on those aspects  now , confident that the other 90 or so speakers who follow me will explore some of these issues in much greater depth . marriage between a man and a woman has been a part of life for centuries , predating nation , church and law . the lifelong commitment of a man and a woman is part of our history and culture . evidence abroad , for example in spain , shows that a redefinition of marriage actually undermines support for marriage in the wider society . there , marriage rates have plummeted . noble lords may advance their own theories as to why this has occurred in spain and elsewhere but the facts are there for all to see and it is reasonable to conclude that redefining marriage is a contributory factor . in the field of education very real fears exist that teachers who fail to endorse same-sex marriage could be dismissed . the minister touched on this and other similar issues . government reassurances that this will not be the case have been challenged as naive by leading counsel . parents will not have a legal right to withdraw children from lessons that endorse same-sex marriage in the curriculum . the effect on schools will undoubtedly be divisive , and we should reflect on the fact that calls have already been made for children to act out gay weddings in class . i have to hand an opinion by leading counsel , prominent in employment law , who concludes that the bill would create a duty to promote or endorse and not just to explain the new definition of marriage in sex education . furthermore , he advises that schools could discipline teachers for failing to teach positively about same-sex marriage alongside opposite sex marriage . employment law is not likely to protect those who , as a matter of conscience , refuse to endorse the new law . some noble lords from the legal profession will want to expand their opinions on this at length . the fact that matters such as this are so strongly disputed , with leading counsel on both sides of the argument , must show that there is legitimate concern that cannot be shrugged off by mere rhetoric . the well-being of children within marriage is a matter of very serious concern , certainly for those who accept the view that the best family grouping in which to grow up is a stable environment with two married parents , one of each sex . these and other major factors will be hotly debated today and tomorrow and they will highlight the sharp divisions that exist on almost every aspect of this bill . so if divisions exist - and they do - we should ask to what extent the government have considered the totality of the problem . in a matter as fundamentally important and potentially so contentious as this , one could reasonably have expected any government with pretentions at governing by consensus to have conducted deep and thoughtful research before drafting legislation . this bill is hallmarked by the very lack of such an approach . a royal commission , or other similar learned group , might have been expected to call on the very best minds from the fields of theology , philosophy , sociology , jurisprudence and finance in order to take a long look at all the implications , to identify the pros and cons and to make mature recommendations . the government did nothing of the sort . instead , they seem to have relied on old , often partial , research and  opinion that give only a fragmentary picture of the problem . there was no royal commission ; no committee of inquiry ; no mention of the bill in any party manifesto prior to the last general election ; no report from any parliamentary select committee . the leader of the conservative party , questioned on sky television only three days before the general election , declared that he had no plans for such a bill . there was no green paper , no white paper and no pre-legislative scrutiny . it was not included in the queen 's speech either last year or this year . however , after its introduction a few months ago , the results in the recent local elections were catastrophic . around 450 seats were lost by the coalition parties , with all the analysis showing that the bill was a significant factor in the swing of voters away from the main parties . the bill 's progress through the house of commons was inauspicious . back-bench contributions at second reading were limited to only four minutes . the government then delegated the bill to a committee of 19 hand-picked mps rather than to a committee of the whole house . its membership was stacked 15 to four in favour of the bill and not a single amendment was accepted by the government . committee debates were limited to only five days , in contrast to the hunting bill , when the standing committee lasted for 14 days . the main parties announced a free vote , but there is a question mark over the freedom of that vote . in a letter signed by 15 mps and circulated on 15 may , serious doubts were cast , citing , " varying degrees of coercion , with threats made , for example , to an mp 's future political career or withdrawal of party support at future elections " . therefore , the apparent solid majority for the bill in the other place must be considered , in part , at least , in that light . the government 's consultation exercise was about how to introduce the changes and not whether to do so . to put it bluntly , the results were rigged . the figures given by the government indicated a total of 228 , 00 responses , with 53% said to be in agreement with the bill and 46% against it - about even , tilting slightly towards approval for the bill . however , that ignored two critical facts . first , the responses in favour were largely collected on the internet - anonymously , with no check as to whether the respondents were resident in the uk and no check on multiple entries from single respondents . secondly , the government accepted a signed petition collected by the coalition for marriage and arbitrarily counted it as one vote , deliberately ignoring the fact that it contained 509 , 00 verifiable signatures . that petition has now grown , i am told , to 660 , 00 signatures , although at the time of its closure there were , as i said , 509 , 00 verifiable signatures . had that number of 509 , 00 been included , as it clearly should have been , it would have shown 83% of respondents against the bill . that considerable public opposition is borne out by many reliable opinion polls . some polls of course suggest the opposite but many have failed to make clear the existence of civil partnerships in posing the question to those being polled .  at this stage , i should say that since my name became linked in public with opposition to the bill and i became something of a lightning conductor in public for all these issues , the number of communications i have received on the matter by e-mail and in my postbag falls just short of 1 , 00 , of which 38 - i counted them this morning - are in favour of the bill and the remaining almost 1 , 00 are against it . i think that many noble lords have had very similar results , if not in those numbers , then certainly in proportion . opposition from formal religious groups divides on the same lines . quakers , unitarians and liberal jews of course support the bill but we should remember that together they represent less than 1% of the religious community . the largest bodies - the church of england , roman catholics , sikhs , muslims and others - all adamantly oppose it . lastly , i turn to the vote at second reading . understandably , some noble lords have queried whether it is proper to challenge a bill in this way at second reading in your lordships ' house . i fully understand that question and i recognise and support the proud and long-standing tradition in this house to take particular care over every aspect of any bill and to give it a full and fair examination before voting . however , that holds good only in normal circumstances , and the circumstances that we face today are abnormal . i am advised by the clerks that it is perfectly proper to vote on second reading . the 2006 joint committee on conventions affirmed that the house of lords retains the power to reject government bills in free-vote situations . votes against a bill at second reading are unusual but they are not unknown . examples that closely parallel these present circumstances are the war crimes bill and the sexual offences (amendment) bill , both of which occurred just over 10 years ago but both were free-vote issues without a mandate from a manifesto . the health and social care bill in october two years ago is the most recent and reliable example . so if we can do it , and have done it , why oppose the bill at this stage ? quite simply , i contend that the bill is in a mess . it is ill thought-through , lacks support in the population as a whole and is likely to antagonise , or even inflame , public opinion . it has nothing to do with equality , which is already in place with civil partnerships , and it attempts to dignify an admittedly very small minority of partnerships with the description " marriage " - a term that has been understood differently for centuries . if that were not enough , there is more . this house is asked to debate and examine a bill that has not yet come anywhere near identifying all the consequences of change . the official government estimate of the numbers of amendments to existing legislation that would follow should the bill become law is , in their words , at least 8 , 00 and they are still counting . it is no good telling me that there is provision in the bill to take care of that , because the experience in argentina , where similar legislation was passed in 2010 , is chilling . in a paper provided by dr ursula basset for the pontificia universidad católica argentina , she explains the changes now being debated in that country , which passed legislation similar to that which is on the table in front of us , in order to establish a redefined civil code . she said :  " it quickly became clear that legalising same-sex marriage required a revolution to our internal law . it impacted laws regulating public order , identity , gender , rules of kinship , filiation , marriage , names , marital property arrangements , divorce , alimony , parental rights , succession , domestic violence , adoption , artificial reproductive techniques , surrogate motherhood , liberty of conscience , criminal law , tax law and employment law , among other topics . all of these subjects would need to be attuned to the gender-neutral paradigm  . . . same sex marriage law in argentina has turned the law upside down - no stone has remained unturned " . that is what we face . were we to consider the bill in committee , on report and at third reading without at least some of that information at hand , it would frankly be like wandering into the dark blindfold . hard on the heels of the procedure today at second reading , it looks as if we may be denied the chance of properly considering the bill in committee , since , to date , only two days have been allocated by the usual channels . even worse than that , we know that as the bill left the house of commons on the last day before the recess the government announced their intention to conduct an immediate review of the whole issue of heterosexual civil partnerships . that is in clause 14 , which was introduced as a manuscript amendment . how can we be expected to consider turning the law of marriage on its head without taking full account of the implications of heterosexual civil partnerships as well ? if we must consider changing marriage , let it be with all the facts at our disposal , all the consequences identified , all the financial implications worked out , all the social advantages and disadvantages known , and not blunder into a legal , theological , moral and sociological minefield . i ask that this bill should be defeated now , and not allowed to take up valuable parliamentary time in the later stages , when so many other pressing matters demand our attention . it should be defeated . the concept should be sent back to the drawing board because this is too serious and too important a matter to be introduced on a whim and handled in such cavalier fashion . the house of lords is the final check , perhaps the only check , on the power of the executive . it should use that power sparingly , but , on this occasion , use it positively . i beg to move .  my lords , the initial proposals published at the end of the autumn have needed much work to get them into today 's form . much of that work has been done through detailed legal effort and discussion . i am deeply grateful to the dcms teams and especially to the secretary of state for the thoughtful way in which she has listened and the degree to which she has been willing to make changes in order to arrive at the stage we have reached today . we all know , and it has been said , that this is a divisive issue . in general , the majority of faith groups remain very strongly against the bill , and have expressed that view in a large number of public statements . the house of bishops of the church of england has also expressed a very clear majority view - although not unanimous , as has been seen by the strong and welcome contribution by the bishop of salisbury . the so-called quadruple lock may have some chance of withstanding legal scrutiny in europe , and we are grateful for it , although other faith groups and christian denominations that have written to me remain very hesitant . there have been useful discussions about the position of schools with a religious character and the issues of freedom of conscience . i have noted the undertaking of the minister on those subjects and am grateful for what she has said . the minister has put forward all her views today with great courtesy and persuasive effect . i join in the remarks of the noble baroness , lady royall , in appreciation of that . i have to say that personally i regret the necessity of having to deal with the possibility of a division at this stage on a bill passed by a free vote in the other place . i was particularly grateful to hear the speech of the noble baroness , lady royall , and agree with the proud record that was established in this area by the previous government during the years in which they held office . if i may , i will pass on her comments with gratitude to my colleague the most reverend primate the archbishop of york . it is clearly essential that stable and faithful same-sex relationships should , where those involved want it , be recognised and supported with as much dignity and the same legal effect as marriage . although the majority of bishops who voted during the whole passage of the civil partnership act through your lordships ' house were in favour of civil partnerships a few years ago , it is also absolutely true that the church has often not served the lgbt communities in the way it should . i express my sadness and sorrow for that considerable failure . there have been notable exceptions , such as my predecessor , the late archbishop ramsey , who vigorously supported decriminalisation in the 1960s . it is also necessary to express , as has been done already , total rejection of homophobic language , which is wrong and , more than that , sickening . however , i and many of my colleagues retain considerable hesitations about the bill . my predecessor , the noble and right reverend lord , lord williams of oystermouth , showed clearly last summer in evidence to the consultation that it contains a series of category errors . it confuses marriage and weddings . it assumes that the rightful desire for equality , to which i have referred supportively , must mean uniformity , failing to  understand that two things may be equal but different . as a result , it does not do what it sets out to do . schedule 4 distinguishes clearly between same-gender and opposite-gender marriage , thus not achieving true equality . the result is confusion . marriage is abolished , redefined and recreated , being different and unequal for different categories . the new marriage of the bill is an awkward shape , with same-gender and different-gender categories scrunched into it , neither fitting well . the concept of marriage as a normative place for procreation is lost . the idea of marriage as a covenant is diminished . the family in its normal sense , predating the state and as our base community of society , as we have already heard , is weakened . i am sure that these points will be expanded on by others in the debate , including those from these benches . for these and many other reasons , those of us in the churches and faith groups who are extremely hesitant about this bill in many cases hold that view because we think that traditional marriage is a cornerstone of society , and rather than adding a new and valued institution alongside it for same-gender relationships , which i would personally strongly support to strengthen us all , the bill weakens what exists and replaces it with a less good option that is neither equal nor effective . this is not a faith issue , although we are deeply grateful for the attention that the government and the other place have paid to issues of religious freedom . however , it is not at heart a faith issue . it is about the general social good . therefore , with much regret - but entire conviction - i cannot support the bill as it stands .  my lords , surely the noble lord , lord dear , was correct to start his speech by saying , in graphic language , that this bill is about imposing an entirely new meaning on a term as familiar and fundamental as " marriage " . throughout history , in all countries and cultures , marriage has been the union of a man and a woman ; and although not every married couple have or want children , the core function of the union has always been the procreation and joint care of children . over the years , of course , there have been changes in marriage law , but throughout history there has been no change in the essential nature of the institution - the union of a man with a woman . it has never been a matter of gays being banned from marrying . it was never even thought remotely possible that the term could be applied to two people of the same sex . now we are told that it is unjust to treat same-sex and opposite-sex relationships differently , but surely it is no disrespect to anyone , just common sense , to point out that we are talking of two types of union which are indeed different - entirely different . from the obligation to care for any children , and to consummate the marriage or face a decree of nullity , to the commitment to sexual fidelity , with the threat of divorce on the grounds of adultery , there is no way in which the union of a man and a woman , with all these serious implications , can be compared with the wish of a couple to see their partnership publicly recognised . i remind your lordships of something that may have been forgotten . on 11 february 2004 , the noble lord , lord filkin , speaking for the then labour government , declared from the dispatch box - unchallenged by any member of the house - that , " marriage should be possible only between people of opposite gender " . - [ official report  , 11/2/04 ; cols . 1093 .] he went on to say : " the concept of same-sex marriage is a contradiction in terms , which is why our position is utterly clear : we are against it , and do not intend to promote it or allow it to take place " . - [official report , 11/2/04 ; cols . 1094-95 .]  what on earth has happened to turn what was out of the question those few years ago into a great national priority ? is it because of a change in the law in other countries ? if that is the case , we should look at what has happened in spain , holland and scandinavia , where , since same-sex marriage has been allowed , the decline in heterosexual marriage has been precipitous . finally , this bill is not just about enlarging the rights of same-sex couples ; it will have a dramatic effect on others . with the deputy prime minister calling opponents of the bill bigots , with lynne featherstone saying they are , " fanning the flames of homophobia " , and with traditional marriage being likened to apartheid and slavery , there is already a nasty whiff of intolerance about , directed at those who support traditional marriage , and with freedom of conscience and freedom of speech threatened . let us not forget that our courts have already ruled in a number of cases , including the celebrated case of the catholic adoption society , that the demands of equality are more important than the right of people to observe the dictates of their faith . so woe betide those working in the public service who express the view that marriage is the union of a man and a woman . each will , if not threatened with dismissal , have a torrid time being treated as bigots . ordinary people with deep feelings about the sanctity of marriage will also be demonised as homophobic and will be very lucky if they do not finish up accused of hate crime . for this , mr cameron thought it was worth picking a fight with his best supporters . it was a big mistake .  my lords , some tend to label anyone who opposes this bill as part of a group of homophobic bigots . once that is said , the argument has stopped . as a labour peer , i wholly dismiss that - i find it insulting . i note , for example , that some key elements of the homosexual lobby , including stonewall , have come to support same-sex marriage only in the fairly recent past . for me , there is a clear distinction between anti-discrimination , which i support , and seeking an absolute equality , which i oppose . i recall that as a young barrister i was saddened to see before the courts a trail of men whose lives and careers had been ruined by the then law . i am also glad that the legal discrimination which existed has been removed by the civil partnership act . if there are deficiencies , they can be met by amendments of the act itself to further protect same-sex couples . today , proponents of the bill appear to argue on the basis of equality , but equality is not an absolute good . i am not a roman catholic , but saw this same false reasoning employed against roman catholic adoption agencies . reasonable compromises were cast  aside by zealots in the name of equality . the juggernaut rolled on . the result was that children lost out , as those caring agencies were forced to close . in this case , the good in question is the institution of marriage , which has never yet been changed . of course there have been changes in the law of marriage , but nothing as fundamental as this change to the institution . marriage as traditionally defined is the union between a man and a woman . a bedrock principle , it relates to the rights of children and their need to know their identity , and is a generational bridge between the past and the future . its fundamental position in our law is well illustrated by the number of statutes that will have to be changed if the law is now passed . the bill seeks to make equal that which is not equal . the relationship between a man and a woman is unique . same-sex relationships are different . perhaps we should seek to find another name for them , if same-sex couples seek dignity . thus there is the problem with this bill of dealing with first , adultery , and secondly , non-consummation . in the bill , same-sex couples are not required to take account of these criteria , but are still deemed to be married . some argue , as we have just heard from the noble lord , that love between any two people is a decisive consideration : " amor vincit omnia " . however , love is not everything . the law of marriage discriminates on grounds of age and affinity : you cannot marry a parent , sibling or child , or marry someone who is already married . why exclude these categories in the new definition ? hence , in the netherlands , a court has endorsed a three-way cohabiting contract . in brazil a three-way union has been allowed . today , the borders are clear . where , then , are the new borders as one sets out on this path ? there will be increased pressures for polygamy . in short , marriage should surely not be available for everyone , even if they love one another . the state cannot lightly modify the meaning of words that have stood the test of time , as with orwellian newspeak . the government announced their proposals in march last year . there was no manifesto commitment , green paper or white paper , and very inadequate consultation on the " how " and not the " whether " . there is no evidence of substantial demand , although there would be some pent-up demand at first . there is no evidence of claims that the change would strengthen the family or the institution of marriage . there is no evidence that the government , in their haste , have examined the effects of the change in other countries . there is no evidence , either , of any serious attempt to protect conscientious objectors , teachers , social workers , registrars , foster parents , or churches which use public halls for worship . why the hurry ? if the government were so attached to the principle of equality , they would have changed both institutions - marriage and civil partnership - from the outset , and would not have been forced into a messy last-minute deal to ensure the passage of the bill . this is not the way to deal with a hallowed institution that has been fundamental to civilised societies from time immemorial . a french philosopher , who was a disciple of rousseau , once observed that our parliament can do anything save change a man into a  woman . this government appear to think otherwise - or at least that parliament can change traditional gender relationships . we know that mr cameron likes consulting the people in referendums . indeed , not only has he promised an " in or out " referendum on eu membership in 2017 , he has enacted already for a referendum whenever there is a transfer of power to brussels . surely this proposed change is far more fundamental to our society than any transfer of power to brussels . therefore , i challenge him to call a referendum . he and his friends will put their case for yes , while many of us - labour , conservative and cross-bench - will be on the other side . let the people decide .  my lords , i refer noble lords to my interests as set out in the register of lords ' interests . many erudite members have already spoken in the debate and i know that many more will contribute later on today and tomorrow . they will discuss what is right and what is wrong with this bill . i start from the premise that all people have a contribution to make to society , each in their different way . i respect them all as individuals and i respect their partnerships . i am very fortunate in that i have never felt any discrimination in being a woman . when i started in public life nearly 50 years ago , it was actually an advantage to be a woman . when i entered your lordships ' house , only 5% of members were women . when i told my husband that i was one in a million , which i was , he was unimpressed . also - perhaps i should not tell your lordships this - when i first came here i received more valentine cards than i ever had as a teenager . i do not ask for or want equality ; i value being different . i do not want to be called a man or treated as a man because women are different . as the right reverend prelate the bishop of leicester said , sometimes we bring something new to politics , to business , to discussions and to life . as your lordships may be aware , i have a particular interest in health and medical issues , where i have seen new specialties emerge . initially , they were part of an existing institution or a royal college . after a while , they felt confident enough to establish and create their own specialty , as with the royal college of general practitioners and the anaesthetists . these royal colleges are now accepted and are respected institutions in their own right . " marriage " is the word that means a union of a man and a woman . same-sex couples have a yearning for equality . initially , they want to attach their union to an existing institution and use existing words . marriage between a man and a woman is different from a union between two women or two men . i believe that the lesbian , gay , bisexual and transgender communities should have the confidence to establish their own institution . what they lack is the lexicology to establish and name their own institution , which will be respected and accepted . i believe that , in time , lgbt people will regret attaching their unions to heterosexual marriage . soon they will say , " no , we are different . we want be different and we need to create our own institution " . like a flag , a motto or a name , they need to find their own terminology , their own symbols to express their  rights and their different contribution to society - acknowledgment and respect for their own institution of partnership . i urge these people to be bold , to be confident and eschew the institutions of others , to build their own and be themselves . it might be sensible to negotiate with lgbt organisations to see if a solution can be found . i do not think there is any need to be overly influenced by what is happening in other countries . we need to look at our own situation differently . it should be for lgbt communities to kick over the traces and be innovative . they should not seek to attach themselves to the institution of marriage . their rights are assured and their love is acknowledged . adopting an ancient word in the belief that same-sex marriage is the same as heterosexual marriage is false ; it is patently different . this false premise on which the bill is founded undermines its rationale . we should reject this flawed bill and have a rethink .  my lords , as i have studied the development of this bill thus far , i have been profoundly alarmed by the violations of constitutional due process that seem to have accompanied it at every turn . i firmly believe , given the four recent precedents for this house rejecting a bill approved in another place on a free vote - the two war crimes bills , the sexual offence bill and criminal justice (mode of trial) (no . 2) bill) - which were backed by the 2006 joint committee on conventions report , that it is both consistent with our role as a revising chamber , and indeed an established expression of it , for us to support the motion proposed by the noble lord , lord dear , today .  in my brief contribution , i would like to focus on three particular points . first , i would like to highlight how no member of the other place has an electoral mandate to redefine marriage . secondly , i will consider the shameful consultation which the government conducted on this issue . thirdly , i will look at how the bill so far has not received effective scrutiny .  no member of the other place has an electoral mandate to redefine marriage . i do not doubt the sincerity of the prime minister and of many members of the other place in supporting the redefinition of marriage , but the fact is that no member of the conservative party , liberal democrats or labour party has any mandate to introduce this change . there was no green paper ; there was no white paper . it was not in the queen 's speech ; it was not in any party 's manifesto . in certain cases , if the change is minor , uncontroversial , or in response to an unanticipated security crisis , it may possibly be appropriate to bring forward a legislative change without a mandate . that , patently , is not the case with the bill before us today , which proposes changing a key social definition at the heart of our society that has been defined one way for millennia . it is quite extraordinary to me that any government should ever dream of making such a change without a manifesto mandate , the denial of which demonstrates no regard for the electorate .  regardless of our views on same-sex marriage , i think that we would all agree that the consultation on the introduction of same-sex marriage has been seriously deficient . initially , the government said that the consultation was about how to redefine marriage rather than whether or not it was actually a good idea to do so . however , the consultation did eventually include a " whether " question after an outcry from opponents of the proposals . when the government agreed to include the whether question , the coalition for marriage asked whether petition signatories could be counted as submissions to the consultation , as endorsement of the petition had the effect of answering question 1 of the consultation . it was told yes , and on this basis opponents of redefinition were not advised that they needed to make a separate submission to the consultation , and on this basis many thousands did not do so .  when the government published their response to the consultation , they said that , while of course they would have regard for the petition , they would not count it as part of the consultation , enabling them to claim a narrow majority in favour of redefining marriage . the fact that the government thereby excluded the views of half a million people despite the assurance that had been given has been a cause of real fury , completely alienating many people from the political process . i find it remarkable that the government thought that it was acceptable to exclude those people from the consultation , which would have found that more than 80% of submissions were opposed to the plan , if they had been included .  it is also important to highlight the fact that the government were absolutely firm in the consultation document that same-sex weddings would not be allowed on religious premises . those who actually managed to get a response registered to the consultation , relying in good faith on the government 's assurances about religious premises , found that the government 's final proposals were radically different to those on which they had consulted . shortly before christmas , the government announced a major policy u-turn : same-sex ceremonies will after all be introduced in churches as well as in civil settings .  next , we must have regard for what happened in the other place . the government ensured that the marriage (same sex couples) bill was committed to a public bill committee , even though the serious and contentious issues involved in this bill warranted a committee on the floor of the house . the public bill committee was made up of 15 mps who had voted for the legislation at second reading and only four who had voted against . after about 10 hours of evidence sessions , mps went on to consider the details of the bill for just less than 20 hours . in contrast , the hunting bill was considered for more than 80 hours in the public bill committee . this included recommittal to a standing committee after one day of report . one could go on and on about the time given to debate . at the conclusion of its commons stages , the marriage (same sex couples) bill had received approximately 49 hours of consideration . by contrast , the 2002-03 hunting legislation received twice as much scrutiny , being debated for 97 hours altogether . it seems clear to me that the marriage (same sex couples) bill simply has not received the level of scrutiny in the house of commons that is appropriate for such contentious legislation .  finally , much more could be said about the lack of respect for constitutional due process that has accompanied this bill on its journey so far . however , now that the bill has reached your lordships ' house - a chamber that , happily , the executive do not control to quite the same extent - there is an opportunity for things to take a different course . i firmly believe that the only failing to date was the failing to have a manifesto mandate , and it is our responsibility as a revising chamber , in line with recent precedent and the joint committee on conventions ruling , to vote no today and ask the government to think again . those parties committed to redefining marriage can place this commitment in their 2015 manifestos and proceed in the usual manner , if they receive the appropriate mandate .  i encourage all members of this house to support the noble lord , lord dear , not in the interest of being for or against a particular definition of marriage but in the interest of upholding and protecting constitutional due process .  my lords , we have been told by many speakers in this debate that the bill is all about equality . people must be treated equally and parliament must ensure it . the first statement is reasonable ; the second is not . certainly we are all equal before the law , but a far higher authority than even anyone here has already decided that people are not equal . some are stronger , cleverer , lazier , plainer or better-looking than others . some people can see , while others are blind . if anyone brings a bill to this house to change that , i will be the first in the lobby to vote for it ; but no bill can change that .  this bill ignores a fact well understood for centuries : marriage is not about just love . of course , homosexuals are often very delightful , artistic and loving people . no one doubts that for one single moment . however , marriage is not about just love . it is about a man and a woman , themselves created to produce children , producing children . a man can no more bear a child than a woman can produce sperm . no law on earth can change that . this is not a homophobic view . it may be sad , it may be unequal , but it is true . this bill is either trying to pretend that it can change men into women , or vice versa , or telling us that children do not need a father and a mother and that a secure framework for children to be brought up in is not really important any more .  there is more mischief here . a free and just country must allow its people to live according to their consciences . we may not agree with their views - that does not matter at all - but they have a right to follow them and live by them . year by year in britain , this right is being eroded . the government assure us that no church and no person will be forced to act against their conscience by this bill . did nobody notice , in earlier debates in the other place , that the government disallowed any amendment that would protect the right to a conscience ? it was all going to be fine and dandy because nobody would be forced to do anything that they did not want to do . however , promises of this kind have been made and broken so many times that we know they are false . it is not fine and dandy . these promises cannot be alone in all the promises that have been made over all the years and proved to be false .  as long ago as 1967 , nurses and doctors were told that those against terminations would not be forced to do abortions . then what happened ? they could not get a job . only last month there were press reports of a court case brought by midwives , still fighting after nearly 50 years for the rights that they were promised and never received . christian teachers now tell us that this bill will force them to teach homosexuality , entirely against their conscience . registrars will be forced to conduct same-sex marriages ; in fact , several of them have been sacked already because they have said that their conscience was against doing so . that no longer seems to matter . however , to me , it matters a very great deal .  you have to close your bed and breakfast if you will not accept gay couples , although pubs can refuse to serve customers - i do not understand that . you will be sacked from your job if you wear a cross - even a teeny-weeny one . catholic adoption agencies , as has been mentioned today , have all been closed because they no longer have the right to follow their teaching , despite earlier assurances that they would be allowed to do so . we should watch how much the law of conscience , and each person having a right to it , has been quietly , piece by piece , disappearing . this is a bad bill , built on lies , and i shall vote against it .   my lords , first , i take this opportunity to thank the very many members of the public who have taken the trouble to write to me on this topic . clearly there is much to be said on both sides of the argument . feelings and emotions are very strong in both directions . to those i have not been able to respond to by now , i apologise . however , their correspondence has prompted me to speak , as well as vote , even though so many of your lordships are also down to participate .  do i support the amendment moved by the noble lord , lord dear ? the degree of change envisaged in the bill to the concepts of marriage - both contemporary and historical concepts - is far more than a mere expansion of meaning on the grounds of equality of treatment . supportive and caring relationships between two individuals may well be as similar in same-sex as in opposite-sex unions and , of course , are to be welcomed . however , there the similarity or equality ends . part of the traditional meaning of marriage embraces its consequences - the consequences of sexual intercourse and of procreation , to say nothing of the concepts of adultery or non-consummation . marriage is far more than a wedding day , an exchange of vows , the honeymoon and mutual support . i know ; i have been married happily for 58 years and have children and grandchildren . so i think it is a travesty of interpretation to claim that marriage under this bill and traditional marriage are so similar as to be categorised and recorded by lexicon as the same .  what has had less emphasis in much of the discussion of this bill is the issue of unintended consequences if it were to pass into law . marriage rights have been abused , for example , by foreigners who seek to gain permanent right of abode in this country by contracting a sham heterosexual marriage with a resident . is there anything in this bill to prevent same-sex individuals from abusing these proposed new arrangements in this way , or a priest from offering his services for payment or being bribed to enable a same-sex couple to obtain a marriage , a union , of convenience and thus to gain residence for both in england or wales ?  how soon might we see an individual claiming that his human rights are being denied because being married to a man does not allow him the same conjugal rights as if he were married to a woman ? therefore , he might argue , why should he not be allowed to be married both to another man and also - not alternatively - to a woman ? it might not be a much greater step beyond that for individuals to argue that a threesome or foursome union would more suit their shared and mutual feelings of love and commitment . could that , too , be called a marriage ?  how much further away from the canon laws that prohibit near relatives from marriages between opposite sexes will the proposals for same-sex unions be compared and allowed to depart ? will the canon laws themselves , in turn , be challenged ? such laws do not have the same rationale in same-sex unions . where is the equality in that ? what would be the financial implications of such extensions to marriage so far as the treasury is concerned ?  should not all of these and many more unintended consequences of this rushed and , i fear , ill conceived bill give this house pause for thought and sound reason to discard it now ? i strongly endorse the amendment of the noble lord , lord dear .  my lords , we have heard some very powerful and moving speeches this afternoon . i heard every one of them and i found this to be a rather emotionally draining debate . i greatly respect the noble lord , lord smith of finsbury , and my noble friend lord black of brentwood , and nobody could have listened to their powerful pleas without being moved by them . it is therefore all the more difficult to take a different line . i find myself very much in sympathy with much of what the noble lords , lord campbell-savours and lord anderson , said and , above all , with much of what the most reverend primate the archbishop of canterbury said .  there is a fundamental flaw in the bill that arises from the manner of its introduction . great social changes such as the abolition of the death penalty or the bill of the noble lord , lord steel , on abortion have generally come about as a result of public campaigns and private members ' bills in another place that have attracted the support of government . this bill has been imposed from on high and in a way that has caused a degree of grief and anguish - i say this directly to the noble lord , lord smith , who also feels grief and anguish - for many of those who believe fundamentally and sincerely that marriage is a relationship between a man and a woman . that is not to denigrate or degrade in any way other human relationships .  i admit to your lordships that i was one of the very few people who voted on third reading in another place against civil partnerships . i did so because i wanted them to be extended according to the so-called " sisters amendment " because i believed that any two people who were in a loving relationship , whether sexual or otherwise , should be able to have the benefits that civil partnerships brought to lesbian and gay people . i have moved since those days and completely accept that civil partnerships have proved to be a good thing . i welcome that , and no one could fail to be touched by what my noble friend lord black said about his civil partnership .  however , true equality in a free society is an equality that protects and asserts difference . yes , as my noble friend lady knight said , we are all equal under the law - but we are different . acts of parliament - again i quote her - cannot enable a man to bear a child or a blind man to see . there are things that we therefore have to recognise as being different . what we have to aspire to is a society in which all , whether they are different by the colour of their skin , religious beliefs or sexual orientation , are not only equal in the eyes of the law and in the sight of god , as they are , but are not discriminated against in any way for those differences . that is the state in which i wish to see our country .  i was much taken by the powerful speech of my noble friend lady cumberlege , who said that you cannot , without changing marriage beyond recognition , have marriage between same-sex partners , but you surely can have an institution that is the equivalent in every sense . i take the point made by my noble friend lord black that civil partnerships perhaps do not quite reach that point at the moment . as a christian who was at one stage opposed , i would welcome the blessing of a union in the church - in my church , the anglican church . the most reverend primate did not go quite so far in his speech as to specifically advocate that , but its logical conclusion was that that is something to which we could and , i believe , should aspire .  if we change the institution of marriage as it is at the moment , we are not making those of the same sex who become married members of an equal institution , because they cannot be . they cannot produce children . i do not say that in any critical sense but merely as an acceptance of the fact . there is a danger that because we sympathise , as we rightly do , and because we want to see the dignity of every human being on an equal footing , we are likely to vote for something that is not in the best interests of society . as a pamphlet i received put it , this is one of the most profound pieces of social engineering ever to be put before parliament . the changing of the definition of marriage in this way should not happen without a popular mandate . the noble lord , lord anderson , talked about having a referendum on whether people want that change . there some logic in that plea . certainly , there has not been any manifesto commitment , and although some brush that aside , it is a real point .  i shall vote with the noble lord , lord dear , tomorrow - although i have some misgivings about having a vote - because of the plea that many of us received from colleagues in another place who said that there had not been adequate preparation and that the free vote was questionable . i know that for a fact from many who have spoken to me personally , who were rather anguished about it . i therefore will vote for the amendment tomorrow - with , as i say , some misgivings - and if the bill is carried i will try and play a constructive part in improving it . the most reverend primate said , just before he sat down and with much regret , that this was not a bill that he could support . nor can i .  my lords , i associate myself closely with the previous speeches from these benches but want to develop the discussion in a slightly different direction . i should emphasise that i am speaking in my personal capacity as a bishop and not , in any formal sense , on behalf of the wider church of england .  i want to focus on the potential impact on the relationship between the church of england and the state . as i listened to the noble lord , lord dear , with his great list of implications for argentina , i wanted to leap up and say , " and we have the church of england to think about as well , on top of all that lot " . it was an issue that did not receive much attention in the debate in the other place - hardly any at all . i say at the outset that the church of england has no right simply to maintain the status quo in our relationship with the state ; nor do we necessarily wish to do so . however , the argument that there has been change , as there has been , in church-state relationships is no argument for any particular change . the weakness in the powerful speech of the noble lord , lord pannick , was that all the changes in marriage that he listed were , in themselves , no argument for the particular change that we are discussing now .  the relationship between church and state has evolved and is remarkably different now from how it was in earlier ages . often changes happen best when they happen almost naturally , in an evolutionary sort of way - that is very much how the british constitution has developed over the years . in that process , it is always important to check that the baby is not thrown out with the bathwater when a particularly striking change is being made and in this bill , something fundamental and foundational is changing . i enjoyed the speech of the noble lord , lord brooke of alverthorpe , but i thought he underplayed somewhat the depth of the change that we are talking about .  to me , the clue is in clause 1(3) of the bill to which very little attention has been paid . i believe it is unprecedented in statute law . the submission of the clergy act 1533 provides that the church must not promulgate canons that are contrary to what the explanatory notes to the present bill call " general law " . arguably , the 1533 act also lays a certain obligation on the state not to pass laws which are contrary to the received canon laws of the church of england . that is how establishment has worked , because to do so would put the church of england in a very difficult position . that is why clause 1(3) , on marriage , exempts our canons from the scope of the submission of the clergy act . in effect , it creates an amendment to the act without quite saying so and therefore legally permits statute law and canon law on marriage to be diametrically opposed in future on the very basic point of who can be married to whom .  in the government documents there is an attempt to draw a parallel with divorce , although that hardly applies at all because the canons of the church of england have never forbidden divorce . there has always been a legal permission to divorce under the canons of the church of england , and so the changes that have happened in divorce law have never come into conflict with the canons - for the very good reason that it was always permitted in statute law . it is also there in the old and the new testament . therefore , this clause is unprecedented in our legislative history .  this helps us to understand why people feel so strongly , although this is one of the questions that we have not really asked . of course , the easy answer is that they are homophobic . that is an easy dismissal than can be made , and who am i to say that this is not sometimes part of it ? i cannot say that . however , i think the reason why people feel so strongly lies elsewhere . there are two roots to it . one is that marriage is given for the conception , nurture and upbringing of children - that is what it is naturally there for , as other speakers have said . i accept that other family arrangements can successfully bring up children , but there is something naturally given about marriage in relation to children . our society has broken that connection in many ways , partly through contraception , but to break it in this radical way needs some thought .  the other reason why people feel strongly is because , in the bible , the marriage relationship is the primary metaphor for how god relates to the world . that is in the old and new testament , particularly in the old , and that is why it is a view also held strongly by jews and muslims , for whom the old testament is a sacred book . the noble and right reverend lord , lord harries , who is not in his place , alluded to this , but did not pick up on the obvious fact that the relationship between god and the world is not symmetrical . it is not a relationship of sameness , but of difference within a deep bond of love . that is why , in that metaphor , if you try to take away the difference between man and woman , it does not work any more . it is partly why people of faith feel so strongly about this matter . there is something about " vive la différence " , which the noble baroness , lady cumberlege , touched on so brilliantly in her speech . there is something basic about it , something visceral , which people feel is being undermined and changed , and that is why they react as they do , even if they do not quite know how to articulate it .  how should we proceed ? i have come to the view that a more radical reconstruction of the law on marriage would be the right way forward . i think it would meet a lot of the issues raised in the powerful speeches that have been made . we should consider going some way towards the continental version , which has a legal , contractual relationship that is the same for everyone , absolutely without question . then we could develop different religious understandings on top of that . that may be a bridge too far : the government thought so when they drew up this rather rushed legislation . several members in the other place drew attention to this as the logical outcome of what we should be doing . much of what we have heard today would potentially be satisfied , amid our society 's many differences , if we separated the legal contract of marriage , which the state establishes as being the same for everyone , and the religious side . i fully accept that that would have implications for establishment but there are unintended consequences of this bill , as the noble lord , lord dear , said , and that is just one of them . it has not been thought out and if we commit this bill to a committee , we are almost saying that the bill can be improved by tinkering : it cannot . what is wrong with it is just too basic . that is why , with the same regrets that the noble lord , lord cormack , mentioned , i shall be with the noble lord , lord dear , in the division lobby .  my lords , i have been in parliament for 39 years and i cannot remember an occasion when so many individuals have sent me personal letters or e-mails so strongly opposing a particular bill .  in my brief contribution , i want to address and focus on the constitutional position . i do so from a background of five years as the 58th chairman of ways and means in another place , handling an equally controversial bill of four clauses , which took 25 days , including three or four nights , but at least on that occasion every member had their voice - indeed , i ended up with a vote of no confidence - but thankfully it was carried with a large majority . that is what should have happened with this bill . this is equally controversial and it should have been handled in another place on the floor of the house so that all members could contribute . sadly , that route was denied them and they ended up with what i would term as a stark chamber-type committee , which i think is a tragedy .  some of us are told that we should not vote on second reading in the upper house . i went through the whole of erskine may but could find no reference there as to why we should not . furthermore , we had it confirmed by the constitution committee here in 2006 that , where there is a free vote , we can , if we so wish , vote against second reading , and that is equally acceptable where there is no mandate for the government .  i then looked as dispassionately as is possible for a parliamentarian at how much work had been done in preparing the bill . there has been no green paper , no white paper and no royal commission . much has been done on a whim , sadly , and that is not a good start for any controversial piece of legislation . it is made even sadder by the fact that three days before the election one of the candidates for prime minister stated that he was " not planning " to introduce same-sex marriage .  i therefore look now at the implications of there being a second reading . how many of us are aware of the thousands of pieces of legislation that will have to be amended by both houses or of the hours that will be taken up with some further primary legislation and a huge amount of secondary legislation ? we all know - do we not ? - in our hearts how much attention is given to secondary legislation in either the other place or here . there will not be any real debate on those parts of the legislation .  is that fair and just to the people of this country ? personally , i do not think so , and i say that based on my parliamentary experience . we must not forget that this house is part of the bicameral parliament and is normally there to act as a revising chamber . however , ultimately , in my view , it is there as a safeguard to parliament and democracy as a whole and it carries out that role for all the people of the uk . safeguards are not met by quadruple locks . locks can be undone by any fiendishly good legislator anywhere in the world , and there are numerous examples of that happening .  therefore , tomorrow i shall vote against the second reading . i thank the noble lord , lord dear , for the considered manner in which he put forward his amendment and for the clarity and courage that he showed in doing so . as i sat here this afternoon , i said a quiet , short prayer to myself : i prayed that someone somewhere was listening to the many words of wisdom that will be spoken over these two days .  my lords , i share many of the concerns of the noble lord , lord dear , although i have to confess that i have spent many a sleepless night agonising over this subject : what is the right position to take ? i , too , am a committed christian and so i have looked for inspiration as to what marriage really is . the earliest reference i can find is in genesis , chapter 2 , which is often used in wedding ceremonies today :  " therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother , and shall cleave unto his wife : and they shall be one flesh " .  one flesh involves a physical and spiritual union : the joining together of the reproductive organs of a man and a woman ; the potential for creating new flesh in the form of a child . non-consummation annuls a marriage and therefore marriage is , and can only be , between a man and a woman . marriage in the jewish tradition was considered to be a blood covenant . they used to keep the bed sheets as proof that the covenant had been satisfied . it is a physical impossibility in a same-sex relationship for the reproductive organs to be joined together , and therefore whatever we seek to call it , it cannot be a marriage in the traditional sense . in fact , it changes the nature and meaning of marriage .  the concept of marriage was not really established by the state ; it existed well before our parliamentary democracy and is an internationally recognised institution that crosses borders , religions and millennia . i do not think that we should seek to change it . if this bill were to pass , in due course we would end up having to create a new vocabulary for words like " father " , " mother " , " husband " and " wife " . this has already been flagged in other countries .  the proposed criterion for marriage is that two people love each other . the word " love " does not appear in the official words that are used in the wedding ceremony . if we accept that love is the sole criterion , then why cannot three people love each other ? in fact , some countries already accept polygamy . this question has been asked in canada , while in the netherlands and brazil judges have legalised what they call a polyamorous relationship , a cohabitation agreement with multiple sexual partners .  the reason marriage is limited to one man and one woman is that it takes no more and no less to produce children . if we were to accept that love is the precondition for marriage , why should we restrict it ? if there is no possibility of genetic offspring or indeed no requirement for consummation , why should not close relatives get married ? if that were to happen , i can see all sorts of interesting possibilities for inheritance tax planning . we would open a pandora 's box . i do not believe we have looked closely enough at the unintended consequences .  despite all the assurances that religious bodies have been given , the european courts can eventually overturn them . i am unconvinced by some of the assurances about the locks that are to be put in place . in any event , a new government could always remove them . equalities legislation has already seen many christians in court , and this legislation will see many more . this bill will also jeopardise employment and possibly criminalise those with traditional views of marriage . we have already seen cases where individuals have lost their jobs over their beliefs . there must be room for conscience . otherwise this purported equality for the few comes at the expense of freedom of belief for the many with strongly held convictions .  the bill purports to address a remaining apparent inequality , but it creates many other inequalities for both sexes and for homosexual couples . couples of the same sex will have the option of civil partnership or marriage , while at the moment heterosexuals can have only marriage . i know that the government have announced a consultation on this , despite initially blocking it because of the £4 billion price tag . will the granting of civil partnerships to heterosexual couples strengthen marriage ? i suspect that it will not . same sex will have no definition of " consummation " . heterosexuals do . same sex will have no definition of " adultery " . heterosexuals do . same sex will not be allowed to marry in northern ireland . heterosexuals can . same sex couples will have limited countries in which they will be accepted and you cannot conduct marriages in those countries without their permission . same sex cannot get married in the church of england , but heterosexuals can . instead of equality we will have created a whole raft of inequalities .  if this bill is passed we will have changed the meaning of marriage to some fuzzy institution without any clear definition and in the process weakened it . it does not have public support . i am not convinced by some of the surveys that have taken place . we have all seen our mail boxes and the number of people who have written to us opposing the bill . the public consultation took account of 100 , 00 comments of dubious origin and ignored 650 , 00 from uniquely identified individuals within the uk . we have seen that 500 imams wrote letters to the dailytelegraph , and a group of asian and black church leaders , representing more than 1 million people , have also written . all these comments have been ignored .  the committee in the house of commons was skewed 70% in favour of the bill and no amendments were accepted . amendments made on report did not address the concerns of the opponents of the bill , in particular in the area of conscience and employment .  this bill fails because it weakens marriage and creates a new institution , albeit with the same name . it will limit freedom of speech and room for conscience . it will eventually redefine roles within a family . it will have unwelcome consequences for all faiths and damaging ones for employment . it also creates new inequalities . it was not in the party manifesto and was expressly ruled out by the prime minister at the time of the election . the public consultation was a sham and for a change of this importance insufficient time has been given to consider public opinion and the potential consequences . we can reverse most laws that we pass in this place . this one we cannot reverse . therefore we should take time to consider our approach carefully .  my lords , i come to this debate with a traditional , basic approach that marriage is between a man and a woman . i am also informed by my life experience of having witnessed over the years the treatment of homosexual people in society , with adult men in jail , persecution , and all sorts of real bigotry - not just verbal bigotry and hurtful language - against such people . this really was persecution . recently , i met a young gay catholic man who was in turmoil about his sexuality , but he still opposed what is wrongly called " equal marriage " ; it is same-sex marriage . hurtful language is a two-way street . to be called a homophobic bigot because you take a traditional point of view is also wrong .  when i was in an elected house and despite not having the luxury of being in an unelected one , i voted for an equal age of consent for young men of 16 ; and i voted for civil partnerships , again on a free vote . it was my decision and my point of view . this was in the elected house . perhaps it is not free and easy now , but there has been a big change in society and i welcome that change . i have always supported initiatives to make sure that all people get equality under the law . i maintain strongly that my record of voting for that while i was in the other house indicates that i do not have to defend myself too much .  the government are responsible for rushing this bill . as the noble lord , lord cormack , mentioned , it is not on the back of a great a wave of support for changing the agreed definition of marriage . surely , cultural and social change in this country comes about when the mass of the public takes the point of view that it is time for change . over a number of years the public has shown that it is time for a change in the way in which society regards homosexual people . they have been treated disgracefully for centuries and it is time that it stopped .  a number of people - more than i would have thought - have said to me that they support the principle of same-sex marriage . i also accept that there is an element of generation in this as well . it seems that younger people are the more open they are to same-sex marriage . i like to think that the moves taken by the labour government , supported by many conservatives , changed society so that it is now acceptable . peter tatchell has been mentioned . we are a long way from the bermondsey by-election , but i will not take lectures from small-l liberals or even large-l liberals , even if i have a traditional point of view . i also took part in the pressure to get rid of section 28 .  these moves reflect a society that was ready for change , wanted it and had tacit support for it . frankly , i do not broadly find that tacit support in the society that i mix in . that is where the government bear a responsibility . they have created divisions . they have exacerbated the feelings of those who feel that this has been forced on them as a way of exorcising section 28 from conservative party history . the comments and pledges made by the prime minister have been mentioned . my main support for society is still there .  i will not vote for the second reading of the bill . i will not vote for the amendment either , because that challenges the revising nature of the house of lords and will put at risk the future basis for us , as a house , to intervene in , revise and improve legislation . i do not believe that the protections promised to the religious organisations are valid , because i see words like " inconceivable " and " almost impossible " . no one from the government will give the absolute guarantee that the roman catholic church , for instance , will not be prosecuted - that someone will not take a case to the european court and win it . where is the guarantee ? during the passage of this bill , if it gets approved and goes into committee , we will look for amendments - not wishy-washy words , but a definite guarantee that churches will not be forced to take part in this and will not be subject to prosecution .  my lords , concern for social justice and human rights are basic to sikh teaching , and i was delighted when the homosexual community was given full protection and dignity under the law through civil partnerships . it is , however , important to remember that social equality and respect for difference is quite different from the pursuit of uniformity and sameness and the deliberate masking of difference by changing the accepted meaning of language - in this case , the accepted meaning of marriage . in this , i share the concerns of the noble lord , lord campbell-savours .  the one fact of life is that we are all different . we all differ in our physical and mental attributes , and in our dislikes and preferences . most people form opposite-sex partnerships , giving birth to children and nurturing them in the family unit . this type of relationship , defined by the parameters of declared commitment , consummation of the relationship and social commitment for the nurture and care of the family , has long been defined as marriage . difference should be respected . while same-sex partnerships are primarily for adult companionship , they do not share the same social responsibilities and parameters that define " marriage " in so many different religions and cultures . what i fail to understand is the pretence that marriage , with its clearly defined parameters and attached responsibilities , is the same as same-sex adult companionship when everyone outside westminster knows there is a world of difference .  there is no evidence of majority support for this measure , even in the gay community . in an article in the daily mail , the well known columnist andrew pierce writes that he is a gay man who opposes gay marriage . alan duncan , the international development minister , who is in a civil partnership , is implacably opposed to gay marriage . david starkey , the openly gay historian , is also opposed to the concept of gay marriage . the labour mp ben bradshaw , who was the first cabinet minister to enter into a civil partnership , has openly criticised the idea of gay marriage , saying that the move to smash centuries of church teaching is " pure politics " and not wanted by the gay community , which has already won equality through civil partnerships .  there is no end of statistics which show that children 's life chances are linked to stable relationships to natural parents . if marriage is diluted to become no more than adult companionship , this will simply add to a growing focus on adult happiness to the inevitable neglect of our children , with more and more being taken into what we call care . if a committed relationship is all-important , where is the logic in not extending this to bigamous relationships ? after all , there are more muslims in this country than gays . why discriminate against this particular religious community ? blind pursuit of unthinking equality can have unforeseen consequences . in mathematics , if you want to see where an equation is heading , you tend to take it towards infinity - look further down the line . here we desperately need to look further down the line .  much has been made of the so-called consultation process . along with other members of the inter faith network , i was invited to a consultation meeting and told that government policy would not be affected by our views . we are back to the world of alice in wonderland : sentence first , verdict after . the 87% majority against the measure has not only been ignored but turned round to claim a 57% vote in favour of the measure .  government assurances that their lawyers see little likelihood of european human rights legislation being used to force people to act against their consciences inspire little confidence when we remember that the same lawyers said that there would be no problem deporting a certain muslim cleric . it is in reality a measure that could well force many with sincerely held religious and ethical beliefs to either compromise those beliefs or lose their jobs . this has already happened to people like adrian smith , who was demoted and had his pay cut by 40% for saying - on his personal facebook , in his own time - that gay marriages in churches would be an equality too far .  this is an ill thought-through measure that seeks to destroy a basic fundamental institution of society without any understanding or consideration of the consequences . it is a measure that has not been consulted on with the public at all and it has no mandate . for these reasons , i fully support the amendment of the noble lord , lord dear .  my lords , it is a pleasure to follow the noble lord , lord singh . i totally endorse his conclusion and i will come to the reasons for that . as the 38th speaker , it is very difficult to make a constructive speech one way or the other on this issue , because all the arguments have been made not just once but many times .  what i would like to do , therefore , as briefly as i can , is to share one or two thoughts and concerns with your lordships . unlike my noble friends lord black -  whose speech moved me - and lord dobbs , who said that they were voting the way they were because they were conservatives , i oppose this bill not despite being a conservative but because i am a conservative . there are thousands of conservatives around the country who take precisely that view .  i am a conservative who came into politics initially at the time of harold macmillan . harold macmillan believed that the duty of a conservative was to conserve and protect that which was good and to replace and mend only that which had had its day or was broken . this bill defies that principle . it is profoundly un-conservative . marriage is not broken . i have not heard anybody today suggest that it is . it is good and we should be seeking to conserve and protect it . instead , this bill seeks fundamentally to alter it .  undeniably , throughout history marriage has changed . the noble lord , lord pannick , set out a whole row of ways in which the process of marriage has altered over the past 200 years . i can add to that . i am a scottish lawyer . when i was called to the bar in scotland you could get married across an anvil at gretna green . you could also get married to what was known as your bidie-in , your long-term partner ; if you had been living with them long enough you could go to the law and say , " can you please now pronounce us man and wife ? " . that was all that had to be done . those are gone now . the form of marriage has altered .  however , one fundamental thing has never altered : marriage is between a man and a woman . even when we heard talk about polygamous marriages , the sexual relations within those marriages were between a man and woman . that is what is fundamentally being destroyed in this bill . it seeks within our law profoundly to alter the meaning of marriage .  let me make one thing aggressively clear . i am not in any way anti-gay . nobody who knows me would ever accuse me of being so . i have attended wonderful celebrations of civil partnerships where same-sex couples who are my friends have expressed their love and commitment to each other and i have rejoiced in being able to rejoice with them . this bill is not about being pro- or anti- gay . that is a dishonest argument by those who make it , and does them absolutely no credit .  rather - and this is my main concern - this bill is highly offensive to many decent , tolerant and moderate christians and to many decent , tolerant and moderate muslims , and indeed to many others , including people of no religion at all , who see it understandably as an attack on something they hold very special and very dear and which has been held so for many years before them . they are angered by the fact that they were not consulted about this . they were not asked about it before the previous election . the consultations that have taken place have not even asked them whether they agreed with it ; they were asked only whether they agreed with the way it was going to be taken forward . they quite rightly feel they have been excluded from something which matters desperately to them - not because they are bigoted or swivel-eyed , but because they are part of a culture , as am i , that believes that marriage is between a man and a woman . this bill does not create the much vaunted equality in marriage . it establishes two different sorts of marriage : statutory gay marriage on the one hand and what i believe will become known as real or traditional marriage on the other . when i talk about real marriage , i am talking about the marriage that people instinctively believe is between a man and a woman . of course , parliament is sovereign . within its own jurisdiction it can change the legal definition of marriage . i have to accept that . this bill may well do so . but for all its sovereignty , what parliament cannot do is change the fundamental meaning of marriage any more than king canute , for all his sovereignty , could order and change the running of the tide - and that indeed was the point he was trying to make when he placed his chair in the sea as the tide came in .  as a result , this un-thought out bill , which has not tested its own principles of equality and has not looked at all the anomalies it is creating , is going to divide our society rather than unite it ; far from equalising , it is going to create discriminations . we will come on to some of those when we get to committee . some of those discriminations are very real indeed . far from achieving understanding , it is already creating confusion . far from building harmony , it will create disharmony , anger and long-lasting hurt . for that reason i will be voting for the amendment tomorrow .  i understand where the noble lord is coming from . i say to him that , in looking at the bill , i personally do not think that the arguments that i have made today can be cured in committee . if they are going to be cured , we will have to start again with a new bill , from the beginning , and get it right . for that reason , very unusually , i will be voting with the noble lord , lord dear , tomorrow .  my lords , time is short and there are many speakers in this debate . therefore , like others , i will aim to be concise . i have four comments to make about the bill . in my opinion the process of the bill is and has been flawed ; the purpose of the bill is misleading ; the premise of the bill is worrying ; and the atmosphere created by the tabling of the bill is potentially divisive , and i regret that .  allow me to substantiate those four assertions . first , the process of the bill is flawed . little i can say here is new , but the facts speak for themselves and are important and bear repetition . a bill such as this did not feature explicitly in any of three major parties ' manifestos at the general election . it did not appear in either of the last two queen 's speeches . the formal consultation process , as we have heard , was purely on the basis of how this redefinition of marriage was to be conducted , not whether it should be conducted . at least that was how it was initially . moreover the consultation counted only as one view the consolidated views of between half and two-thirds of a million citizens who signed the coalition for marriage petition , each giving verifiable addresses . only a short period was allocated for debate in the other place , where there are also doubts - and they have been expressed today - as to how free the supposed free vote in the other place was , not to mention the composition of the committee that gave cursory consideration to the bill .  secondly , i suggest that the purpose of the bill is misleading . it is supposed to redefine marriage so it becomes as equal an institution between same-sex couples as it is between a man and woman . this purpose is a contradiction in terms . a redefinition of marriage cannot bring equality . the defining process of marriage is consummation , which is for the entirely practical purpose of bringing children into the world - the creation of families which have been the building block of society for centuries . the marriage of two men or two women cannot naturally bring about the purpose of marriage ; legally perhaps , but naturally not .  thirdly , i believe the premise of the bill is worrying . it is supposed to promote the rights of a minority within our population by affording that minority a supposed equality in marriage . i have already argued that that cannot be so , but in the erroneous pursuit of that supposed equality , a bill that is designed to promote the interests of a minority itself becomes a powerful piece of legislation that threatens the traditional interests of a majority of our population . the supposed safeguards being written into the bill to protect the rights of many sections of our society to express the traditional view of marriage in private and in public will not be worth the paper they are written on . the inexorable march of litigation will frustrate over time whatever parliament may , or may not , have intended .  fourthly , i fear that the atmosphere created by the tabling of the bill is potentially divisive . for decades there have been vigorous debates about the acceptability of homosexual orientation and lifestyles . tempers have been raised and emotions have flowed , but whatever individuals thought about homosexual or heterosexual lifestyles , an atmosphere of acceptance and tolerance has been established in all but the most narrow-minded circles . the tabling of the bill runs the risk of driving a cart and horses through that atmosphere , which has been carefully built up , of acceptance building on previous tolerance . in 2008 , i became the first chief of staff of any of the three armed services to give the opening address at the armed forces annual lgbt conference . my theme in that address focused on one of the army 's six core values - respect for others . i may not personally have understood or approved the circumstances of those who were members of the armed forces lgbt community but i had an obligation to respect them as individuals . such respect and tolerance are being severely challenged by this ill-thought-through bill .  in conclusion , i soundly oppose this bill for the four reasons i have given but if i had to pick one of them as my principal ground of objection and why i shall vote with the noble lord , lord dear , tomorrow , it is the first one . i believe that the process of this bill has , to date , been tantamount to an abuse of process which , as a member of the mother of parliaments , i am deeply uncomfortable about . following due democratic process and procedure is a principle that i spent the 40 years of my professional life as a soldier upholding . we fought for the ballot box against the armalite for 38 years in northern ireland ; we stood for democracy against communism for 44 years in europe ; we stood for the democratic right of self-determination in the falklands in 1982 and still do ; and now as a parliamentarian i am asked to accept an abuse of the democratic process , and i will not do it .  this bill is of historic importance and in my view history will judge us poorly if this issue was thought to have been fast-tracked to the statute book without due regard to the established democratic and parliamentary processes .  my lords , it an honour to follow the noble lord , lord dannatt , and i particularly want to thank him for what he said about respect . i say to my noble friend lady stowell how very much i appreciated not just her speech , to which i will return in a moment , but her joke and tell her that if she can maintain that tradition in her political life , particularly in a chamber where everybody is uptight about something else , then she has a very bright future ahead of her .  my noble friend said that she respected those in the faith community who took a different view from this bill . the noble baroness , lady royall , said the same thing . i was initially warmed until i thought about it . i have been enormously privileged to spend 36 years in this building , man and boy , and i cannot count how many times i have been told i have been respected when the minister meant that i was about to be ignored . if the government really respected the faith community , as they say they do , then this bill would not be here today . it was interesting that the religious freedom focus was on the 1% and not on the 99% , whereas if faith was going to be respected , the focus would have been on the 99% and not on the 1% .  my noble friend lord dobbs gave us a very enjoyable piece about not understanding what traditional marriage is . that got me thinking , although i have done no survey , that most of the members of your lordships ' house will have been married , probably most in church . therefore we will all have acquiesced to a priest , pastor or vicar saying something to the effect that what we were going through was one man , one woman , and for this reason you leave father and mother to become one being , exclusively for life , and for procreation . not everybody gets it right , but that is what was defined as the traditional marriage . the words are the words of jesus , and when jesus used them , they were the words of creation . therefore , as a practicing christian , i have a problem with this legislation , because i do not believe that it respects faith and the sincerely held views of those in the faith community .  it is also hard to have respect for this bill politically . in may 2010 the prime minister said that there would not be any legislation . seventeen months later he was cheered to the rafters by a conservative party conference when he told them that he was in favour of same-sex marriage because he was a conservative . i will tell you something - he will not try that again in 2013 . it will not happen . it is hard to have political respect and hard to have it off the back of what passed for a public consultation . those in this house who know me well will not be surprised if i say that i was brought up on gospel stories . when i saw the public consultation i was rather irreverently reminded of jesus turning water into wine . this government turned half a million votes into one vote in order to get 53% in favour when actually 87% were against . forgive me , but i cannot have respect for that sort of behaviour .  i want to say to the noble lord , lord mcavoy , something which he will never have expected me to say , and he will be encouraged to know that i am as shocked to hear myself saying it as he will be to hear me say it , for he and i go back a long way . but he was right . major social change comes when the majority demands it . major social and cultural change is not a product of the minority . if it is to be successful , it will be a product of the majority .  i have used up my time . for 40 years my life has been driven by christian and conservative convictions , and now i am led to believe that because i continue to hold those values and principles i am a swivel-eyed loon . i want to raise a flag for swivel-eyed loons , because at the very heart of our country and our party is a commitment to time-tested values and principles . it is easy to lose respect . if you lose respect you lose trust , and if you lose trust you are in big trouble - and remember , i was the party chairman in 1997 , so i know whereof i speak . this government need to focus on respect , and if they are going to do that they need to start by taking this bill away and producing something an awful lot better .  my lords , i shall be brief . i echo what the noble lord , lord mawhinney , has just said . however , let us agree that the bill has the noblest of aims : advancing the cause of fairness and equality to a minority absurdly disparaged and cruelly treated , not only in centuries past but in many societies even today . however , the bill 's aims must be addressed with forethought and wisdom , of which it shows an embarrassing deficiency at present . i , too , urge the government to withdraw this current muddled and flawed attempt . the equality that it purports to seek is a cheapened version of spurious uniformity in glaring defiance of reality . our gay community , talented and caring , deserves better and can have it .  i wondered when i first looked at the bill , whether amendments could bring it up to scratch . in places , they clearly might . in clause 9(7) , for example , the bill enables the conversion of civil partnerships to marriage , but permits such conversion to have an effective date that would be several years before the relevant form of marriage became legally possible . there , surely , is an absurd anomaly that could be rectified by amendment .  however , as i read further and , of course , before having heard the devastating critique of the noble lord , lord dear , today , it became obvious that only a thorough reworking of the bill , with a root-and-branch rethink of its proposals and their implications , could do the job . this is perhaps especially manifest in the 60-page document , laughably called explanatory notes , which has several explanations such as this one on page 29 , which states that ,  " ' husband ' here will include a man or a woman in a same sex marriage ... in a similar way , ' wife ' will include ... a man married to a man " .  such linguistic acrobatics , distorting the marital bed into a procrustean one , are inherent in the bill at present . they smack , not so much of humpty dumpty 's world - as the noble lord , lord dear , implied this morning - as of the dystopias of jonathan swift and george orwell . after all , lewis carroll was only joking ; swift and orwell were deadly serious .  my lords , i think by now most things have been said about the bill . nevertheless , i will repeat some of them because i want my views to be on record . the first thing i want to say is that the bill is an outrage to democracy . no political party had the guts to include this measure in its manifesto . it is a measure that undermines the concept of marriage that has lasted for centuries . the bill , as we have heard , was rushed through the house of commons , ignoring the generally accepted rule that bills with constitutional implications should be discussed on the floor of the house rather than in committee . that point was previously raised by the noble lord , lord naseby . under this circumstance , this house has not only the right to return the bill to the commons but the duty to do so , because it does not have the wholehearted consent of the house of commons or , indeed , of this place or the country as a whole . i want it returned to the commons because i believe that it should reconsider its position and either delay the bill until the next election , when it can be included in the various parties ' manifestos , or hold a referendum on the matter later this year or early next year .  some noble lords have said that this house does not have the right to return the bill to the house of commons and no right not to give it a second reading , but it has every right to do so - and , as i have said , it has the duty to do so , so that the whole matter can be reconsidered . the noble lord , lord dobbs , said that there would be bad consequences for this house if we ignored a commons bill in this way . i have been here for 33 years and , whenever anything like this has come up , we have heard the same threat , but we are still here - and we will probably be here for a very long time yet .  like other noble lords , i have been inundated with letters and e-mails about the bill , and the overwhelming majority of them have urged me to oppose it , which indeed i shall do by supporting the amendment tabled by the noble lord , lord dear . we have heard claims that the public are all for this bill ; we have heard all sorts of figures bandied around . my postbag and e-mails do not show that . indeed , i well remember being told that an overwhelming number of people in the country supported av and that it was more democratic . however , when we had a referendum on it , only about one-quarter of them thought it was a good thing . we had the same problem over regional government ; when that was put to the vote , after it had been lauded by the then government , who presumably believed that the people were for it , in the prime minister 's own constituency they voted against it by 3 .5 to one . therefore , we should be very careful about the claim that is being made that a large majority of the country is in favour of this legislation .  those who have written to me find themselves in a situation where they feel that they cannot be heard . indeed , i have to say that when the three parties agree to anything we lose our democracy . we are , in fact , in respect of this bill , living in a one-party state , because the electorate can do nothing about it . bills are rushed through . the major political parties believe , cynically , that since they are all in favour of it , at the next election people opposed to it will have nowhere else to go - that all the parties are in favour of it , so people cannot vote for an alternative . of course , they can do other things , such as abstaining or voting against all those parties and all the mps who supported the bill . they cannot vote against peers , of course . i will have great pleasure tomorrow in supporting the amendment of the noble lord , lord dear , and i thank him for moving it .  my lords , this bill is promoted as a measure to end a discrimination against homosexuals , but the present law of marriage does not discriminate against homosexuals . the rights of a homosexual man are identical to mine . subject to the laws on incest and bigamy , we are each free to marry a woman . neither he nor i may marry another man . our positions are identical . if it were to be held that the wish of a homosexual man to marry another man being thwarted by law was proof of discrimination , then the law forbidding polygamy would equally be proof of discrimination . therefore , undoubtedly , we should move , on the basis of the arguments that have been put forward in favour of this bill , towards making lawful the marriage of one man with two or more women , or a woman with more than one man .  it does not end there . the claim that the bill merely undoes an act of discrimination is false ; it is worthless and deserves no credibility . those who support this bill must find some other reason for it than that . if the bill were to be enacted , it would introduce a real and novel form of discrimination . i understand that there is no definition of how a same-sex marriage would be consummated , or of what would be regarded as adultery in a same-sex marriage . therefore , a heterosexual marriage would stand liable to annulment because of non-consummation but a homosexual marriage would not . similarly , a heterosexual husband or wife might be found to have committed adultery , whereas a homosexual could not be found to have committed adultery . that is real discrimination . then , of course , we would have to change the law for heterosexual marriage to bring it into line with homosexual marriage and abolish adultery and non-consummation . that would be madness .  then there is the matter of the law of succession and its interaction with this bill . there is , i believe , no bar to a lesbian succeeding to the throne . it may happen . it probably will , at some stage . what , then , if she marries and her partner bears a child by an anonymous sperm donor ? is that child the heir to the throne ? if the queen herself subsequently bore a child by an anonymous donor , which child then , if either , would inherit the throne ? the possibilities must have been discussed in the deep consideration of this bill in government , so the minister must know the answer . if she does not know it immediately , i am sure that her officials will be able to give it to her , because it has all been discussed thoroughly .  finally , i must express my concern for those employed in schools and churches . would their jobs be at risk should they question the new orthodoxy ? section 28 of the education act prohibited teachers from promoting homosexuality and was denounced by the liberal establishment . this bill seems to require teachers to promote marriage between homosexuals . what will the liberal establishment say then ? there must be some explanation for that . we know already that a voluntary chaplain to strathclyde police force has been dismissed for supporting real marriage . no doubt noble lords have received a letter , as i have , from ormerods solicitors , setting out the concerns of many people over the impact of the bill on those in the church and the teaching profession . marriage exists not just for the convenience of couples but to stabilise society . it seems to me that this house would be wise to refuse a second reading for the bill until all these concerns have been met . i underline again what has already been mentioned this evening in quoting page 29 of the explanatory notes to the bill . it states :  " this means that ' husband ' here will include a man or a woman in a same sex marriage , as well as a man married to a woman . in a similar way , ' wife ' will include a woman married to another woman " .  does that sound like gobbledegook to any noble lord ? it sounds not merely like gobbledegook but the reversal of the natural and normal meaning of words . it is no good my noble friend waving his hand in that peculiar gesture . that is what it says in the explanatory notes to the bill that he supports . i will support the amendment of the noble lord , lord dear , tomorrow night .  my lords , the first thing i must say is that i have absolutely no choice about how i vote on this issue . the principle of marriage being a union between a man and a woman for life is sacred , and the role that it plays in binding together families and nurturing children is an indispensable part of the fabric of our country . that has always been one of my core beliefs and i cannot desert it now . i really do believe that if this bill were to become law , untold and unforeseen damage would be done to our country and to how we see ourselves .  this issue is not like a debate and a vote on the national health service , on our nation 's defence or even on the structure of your lordships ' house , important though those matters undoubtedly are . as far as i am concerned , this is a change that we should not even be contemplating or debating . the fact that we are is a very sad indicator of just how far our country has lost its moral compass or perhaps of just how wide now has grown the gulf between the people and those who govern them . i feel sure that millions of people share my beliefs and concerns to a greater or lesser extent and that , if this measure goes through , their belief in what their country stands for and the role of your lordships ' house will be severely damaged .  if this proposal has genuine merit , what harm can voting against its second reading at this time honestly do ? the worst that can happen is that the bill will be delayed , giving time for government , all the political parties and the people in the country to think the matter through carefully . it can then be put forward again properly in a fair and honest way at the next general election , which is now not very far away . that is the worst that could happen .  but what is the worst that could happen if we allowed the bill to pass its second reading without having thought carefully about all its ramifications , and without a proper political and national debate , which of necessity must be thorough and will take some time ? i say that that would prove to be a disastrous course of action and one that we must set our faces against .  i beg noble lords not to be bamboozled or seduced by the argument that says , " just vote for the second reading and all your concerns will be ironed out at the committee stage " . once your lordships have agreed to a second reading , the game is lost ; they have sold the pass . a question of principle becomes a war of attrition in which the government almost always prevail . noble lords should remember that they will constantly be told , " well , you voted for it at second reading " .  the role of this house , and its legitimacy and relevance in the world today , are constantly being questioned - not , i hasten to add , by me . i have the utmost faith that this house will always do the right thing at the right time . however , these questions still hang over us .  let us be honest : there is no desire or support for this bill in the country . this is surely the moment to demonstrate our relevance , our understanding and our purpose in a way that will earn the undying gratitude of many immediately and , i believe , the vast majority of the british people when they come to understand what really was at stake . i will certainly support the amendment of the noble lord , lord dear , tomorrow .  my lords , we have heard some stirring speeches today . no one doubts their sincerity and commitment . i particularly want to thank the minister for the way she contributed to the debate in her opening speech , and the tone she set . that tone has been followed throughout the day . i also want to thank the noble lords , lord black and lord smith , for their personal testimony of what it means to be homosexual , and the noble lord , lord browne , as well . we need to hear those kinds of stories and take them into our system , so that we can think more about them in the days ahead .  in three weeks ' time my wife and i will celebrate our 53rd wedding anniversary . i know that some members of this house can claim to have served longer in the marital stakes than we have , but whether we have been married for just a few months , for as long as i have or for longer - perhaps the noble lord , lord tebbit , has the edge on me - all of us can say that along with the joy , the difficulties and some tragedies that happen to us on the way , marriage is at the heart of human love and society .  those of us who were married according to the book of common prayer will recall the preface to the wedding service :  " and therefore is not by any to be enterprised , nor taken in hand , unadvisedly , lightly or wantonly " .  although addressed to the couple , the words can bear the broader meaning that nobody should take marriage lightly or indifferently . it is the view of many people that , sadly , this has happened and is happening . the noble lord , lord dear , in his brave speech , gave voice to that . we are treating it all too lightly .  the conservative party knows that if the intention to widen marriage to include same-sex couples had been put in its manifesto , it would not have been in a position to form a coalition . discussion of this fundamental building block of society - we have all described it as that - has been thwarted at every turn . there has not been a proper debate , and the consultative process has been a shambles because , right from the outset , the government have made it clear that the consultation has never been about whether same sex couples should marry , but how it might be achieved .  that is now behind us , but there is a proper question that has come through our debate today , and it is one that i have heard from same-sex couples . they ask , " when you talk about celebrating married love , why can't it be for us as well ? " that is a very important question that we need to face up to . those proposing change usually argue , as they have done today , in terms of equality . but with respect , we are told that those in same-sex relationships already have parity with marriage through civil partnerships , which give them equal rights . equality is hardly the right term to use when comparing same-sex couples with those who are married , not least because marriage is not , and has never been , viewed in terms of sameness , as the right reverend prelate the bishop of chester mentioned earlier , but of difference - the difference of male and female , which creates and nourishes life .  of course , marriage does not have to include children , but in the majority of cases it does . it is a procreative institution . this is the major and crucial difference between marriage and civil partnerships . this point has not come across as powerfully as it should . those of us who are resisting change are not doing so because we are cussed or bigoted , but because of the fundamental principle that marriage can only be between a man and a woman . we should not fall into a trap . we have heard once or twice that morality is on only one side of this debate ; it is not . those of us who disagree are morally concerned about the issue as well .  i will end by making this point . i have no doubt whatever that should this bill pass , marriage as we know it will be weakened and diminished . i do not believe that redefining marriage to include same-sex couples will strengthen it , as the home secretary has declared on several occasions . recent research in countries where the marriage of same-sex couples is already a reality shows the collapse of traditional marriages alongside same-sex marriages . when we vote on the bill tomorrow , we need to bear this evidence in mind . we shall all follow our consciences , of course , but i shall keep faith with the institution of marriage as i have experienced it and as i have taught it . therefore , i will vote for the amendment moved by the noble lord , lord dear .  my lords , i regret that i cannot wholly follow or agree with the noble baroness . many speakers today have pointed to the social changes of the past 50 or more years . i do not , however , believe that progress is either automatic or linear . i agree with the noble lord , lord alderdice , that the proponents of change must justify their case to the full .  i regret very much that the fine old english and french word " gay " has , in my lifetime , been appropriated by a small but vocal minority of the population . the result is that it can no longer be used in its original and rather delightful meaning . now , under the pretext of securing equality , her majesty 's government are proposing to change the meaning of marriage . it is surprising that the leaders of the conservative party , who might be expected to uphold traditional values , should lend themselves to this attempt . my noble friend lord dear and others have pointed out the constitutional and procedural defects of this bill , so i will not repeat them . i do however agree with those who have identified unintended and unanticipated consequences .  after these criticisms , i will try to be constructive . civil partnerships are already recognised in and defined by law . surely the whole country should regard them as being an honourable status not to be entered into lightly but rather with the intention of permanence , as several noble lords have already argued . why should civil partnership be considered a second-best choice or a " make do " , as the noble lord , lord deben , put it , which somehow must be promoted to equality with marriage ? those who are in or who propose to enter civil partnerships have a responsibility to live in such a way that their status deserves as much respect as that of married couples .  i conclude that the whole matter has not been adequately considered . it urgently needs further and deeper thought . we should not be rushed off our feet just because some other countries have already legislated for same-sex marriage or because the bill may be needed to cement the coalition . there is ample evidence that public opinion , including medical opinion , is against the bill . i therefore support my noble friend lord dear and will vote for his amendment . i commend his courage and thoroughness .  my lords , i got a phone call last week from a former colleague of mine , whom i had not heard from or seen for some time , asking if i would come to his same-sex wedding . i said , " yes , when is it ? " . he said , " as soon as you lot have passed the bill " . i said , " we might not pass it " . he said , " well , you 'll vote for it won 't you ? " . i said , " no , i won 't " . he said , " well , you can 't come to the wedding then " . i said , " you 've just exercised extreme prejudice against me . why are you doing that ? you 're pleading that you want this in order not to have prejudice , and now you 're prejudiced against me because i 'm saying that i 'm going to vote against it " . then he said , " it 's not you we want , anyway , it 's your wife - she 'll really make the party rock . can she come instead ? " . i said , " yes , of course she can . you had better write and ask her . she 'll agree " . they did and she is going .  i said , " by the way , is this anybody i know ? " . i thought it might be another member of the team . " no " , he said , " we 've been together for eight years , but he 's someone you don 't know " . i said , " good luck " . he then said , " tell me , really , why you aren 't in favour of this " . i said , " i 'm not in favour of it because you 're going to create a series of new minority sectors in the community . you think that you 've been underprivileged and that you can now get to a point of parity , but you 're going to be like the animals at the end of george orwell 's animal farm . you 're all going to be equal , but some of you will be much more equal than others . and what are you going to ask for next ? this is the way it 's going " . he said , " it 's very unfair " . i said , " look , my concern here is that this is introducing a new division and a new disturbance into british society at exactly a moment when we ought to be putting all of that behind us and getting on with being one nation , trying to sort out the dreadful problems we 've got without worrying about creating new sub-divisions - and you are a sub-division that will cause a major rift in society " .  i base that view on the fact that i have had a vast number of letters , as my noble friend lord naseby said . i think i have had 393 and only three of them have been in favour of this bill . one of them , which i thought was very sweet , was from a lesbian christian society . another , which was absolutely amazing , was from a major research organisation , stating that homosexuality was good because it was an essential part of the evolutionary process for the human psyche . i am still trying to work that one out . as for the rest , everything has been a heartfelt expression of the anxieties that people have over what this will mean for them .  i live in west sussex , where we have a very strange situation . on the border of the diocese of chichester , we have two villages called eartham and slindon . they are a case study in how the british public reacts . eartham is a catholic community and slindon is protestant . on one day each in the past 450 years , the populations of those two villages have got up , presumably had a good breakfast and gone out with the express intention of massacring the entire population of the other . they both failed , but they had a very good go at it . the point is that two villages can hate each other to that extent on religious principle and do it for so long .  we have now at last got it sorted out . the tragedy of slindon and eartham is the first thing that strikes you when you walk into them : there are no war memorials for the first world war . that is serious . if you do not have a war memorial in a village , it means one of two things . it usually means that somebody in that village was executed for desertion and , therefore , the village is suffering from shame and shock and will not put up a war memorial . in slindon and eartham there are no war memorials , but not for that reason . the reason is that when you look at the names of the people who died there - a lot died at the first ypres - the same names appear on the catholic and protestant registers . they are not the same people . they are brothers divided by their religion , which is shocking . that they can live together , go to war together and die together , but not be remembered together , is an outrage . i hope that the right reverend prelates in front of me will give some serious thought to the possibility that there is a wonderful opportunity for the church of england to commemorate the outbreak of the first world war next year by setting about a systematic correction of all the missing war memorials in the country to include the 304 , 00 people who were led out by protestant priests to face the firing squad . it would be a very nice gesture after this interval of time , and it is way overdue .  we have here an extremely unquiet and disturbed community , which is expressing grave anxiety over what it has . we have heard today that there are real reasons why we have not thought about this long and hard enough . i will wholly support the noble lord , lord dear , in his vote tomorrow , and hope that we will get down to some serious thinking to put it right .  the one word i have not heard enough of today is " marginalisation " . there is a real prospect of marginalisation coming in here . i am particularly unimpressed by the story of the australian sexual equality board , which received a complaint from the two opening batsmen of the australian women 's cricket team saying that they had been dropped because they were the only two non-lesbians on the team . they wished to complain , whereupon the board wrote back and said , " if you think that this board exists to look after the interests of a couple of straights like you , you have got another think coming . we exist only for the sake of looking after the gays " . that is marginalisation . the board then rather spoilt the argument by saying , " in any event , ladies , neither of you scored enough runs to be worth bothering with " .  my lords , marriage between a man and a woman has been the bedrock of society over the centuries and has proved to be a tried and trusted way of living and rearing children . the bill that we are debating threatens the sanctity of marriage by the forced acceptance of same-sex couples . there are basically two levels to the traditional definition of marriage : the secular civil partnership and the religious commitment . the civil partnership is the practical relationship between two individuals who have decided that they wish to live together . the religious and spiritual part of the marriage contract is defined by the particular religion that is involved .  the civil partnership element of marriage rights is readily available to same-sex couples . the question underlying this debate is whether the state has the right to require religions to accept same-sex couples . the bill before us , in its 52 pages , argues that it does - but i am one of the many speakers in this debate who do not accept that the government have the automatic right , and who therefore believe that the bill should be rejected . i therefore will be supporting the amendment proposed by the noble lord , lord dear .  my lords , the noble lord , lord jenkin , observed that , from a christian perspective , god can be present in every true love . i absolutely agree . but marriage is about more than love . then we are told that the issues at stake here are equal rights , justice and social inclusion . certainly , these are things about which governments may legislate . indeed , if they wish to support particular kinds of relationship by according them tax and pension benefits , that must be a matter for normal political debate . however , in this bill the government have chosen to proceed not by addressing real , material or legal inequalities but by redefining the key concept of marriage and its meaning .  when parliament legislated for civil partnerships , society gave legal and institutional expression to what many hold to be true - that gay and lesbian people should have the same rights to formalise their commitment to each other and enjoy the social and legal benefits that opposite-sex couples have . if there are matters in that legal provision that are inadequate or missing , rights that have not been conferred or legitimate aspirations not recognised , then that act should be amended , and that would have my general support . however , the battleground that the government have chosen is not material but conceptual . the argument is driven by emotional rather than logical considerations , which is why it is so difficult to debate . no matter how loud the protestations to the contrary , at stake is a shared and common understanding of the concept of marriage , together with the consequences - intended and unintended - to which they may lead .  we are told that the scope of marriage has evolved . it has , but " scope " , my lords , not fundamental nature . the scope , as shown by the noble lord , lord pannick , has been varied through history with regard to age of consent , number of permitted spouses , termination , what is allowed or prohibited and restrictions on members of the same family group . what has remained constant in all times and all cultures until very recently is an understanding of marriage founded on the premise of sexual differentiation and the resulting generic potential for procreation . it is with this unchanging basis that marriage has taken otherwise different forms .  the christian tradition , in an understanding that has hitherto also informed english law , speaks of sexual union , the sharing of worldly goods , the help and comfort of one for the other , and the procreation and nurture of children . on their own , none has been understood to constitute marriage . indeed , each of these worthy objectives may be found embodied in other legal arrangements . an agreement to share goods may be a valid contract , but it is not marriage ; nor does sexual union of itself constitute marriage . family units with children exist and have always existed outside the bonds that are recognised as marriage . there are many forms of human relationship for the support and encouragement of mutual love and comfort that are not marriage . yet now , a commitment to love and be loved , arbitrarily confined to just two non-related human beings , is to be the sole basis for the married state .  many of those advocating this development have sought to portray any opposition to it as a faith issue . it is not ; it is a societal one . shorn of the element of complementarity of genders , all marriage will be redefined , with consequences for all . until now , common to the definition of marriage accepted by church and state has been an understanding that a marriage is not completed in the marriage ceremony , wherever that may take place . marriage must also be consummated - completed - in the sexual union of male and female , and is voidable if it has not been consummated . however , with the marriage of two people of the same sex , the proposed law says that these provisions do not apply . where is the equality in that ?  similarly , the current definition of adultery will remain unchanged - sexual intercourse outside marriage with a person of another sex - which , again , does not apply to marriages between those of the same sex . where is the equality in that ? therefore , a bill predicated on the claim that marriage should be equal and gender is irrelevant has to recognise that this logic breaks down when confronted by the reality of marriage as hitherto universally understood . however , the proposals contain their own logic , which is that over time the historic understanding of marriage must in law cease to exist . despite this huge difficulty , i have still tried to understand the motivation for this radical reform . why was civil partnership insufficient ? such partnerships already allow couples to share the legal benefits of marriage and , if there are remaining differences , it is easy to amend the law . i struggle to hear what is missing . i do not underestimate the power of law to change attitudes , but the question is , which law , and what is missing that would make such a difference ? a civil partnership is an act of registration , simply recording in law what is already deemed to exist , whereas marriage , in law , is seen as a " performative act " . it brings something new into being , something that until the exchange of vows and consummation did not exist . a desire for such a performative act , a ritual , and an opportunity publicly to commit to mutual love seemed to be aspirations which i could appreciate , and so the law on civil partnership could be changed without depriving marriage of its single , central meaning .  however , clause 9 of the bill provides for an existing civil partnership to be transformed into a " marriage " simply by signing a register . if one marriage is simply a matter of civil registration without vows , performative acts or criteria for consummation , no provision concerning adultery , or presumption of parenthood , and if the word " marriage " is to have a single coherent meaning , then for every other marriage it must be the same . marriage is now civil partnership by another name . a basic understanding of marriage , in law , will have irrevocably changed , and with one reality now bearing two different labels ; or we will have legislated into being two very different realities , but confusingly bearing the same name . if that happens , it raises huge issues about social cohesion , and a move away from common shared values . i remain profoundly uncertain about the legal position not just as regards the personal views of teachers but as regards what may be taught in church schools . are they to be allowed to teach a traditional understanding of marriage , one which until now church and state have shared , while in non-church schools a different understanding is to be taught ? if so , what will be the implications for social cohesion as a result ? or will church schools be forced by law to conform to a new understanding which has no roots in the doctrines of any of the major faith communities , which then sets an extraordinary precedent for the state 's power to determine articles of faith , unparalleled outside the experience in history of repressive ideological states of the extreme right and left ?  further , what is to prevent other multiple understandings , including recognition of polyamorous , polygamous and polyandrous relationships , being legislated for in due course ? that is the internal logic of tackling a legitimate issue of inclusion through the redefinition of concepts rather than addressing any real inequalities that may exist .  there is a quotation from margaret thatcher in charles moore 's biography :  " equity is a very much better principle than equality " .  in conformity with that principle , my hope is that the government will withdraw the bill , full of so many seen and unforeseen consequences for the fabric of our society , and start again to produce something which truly does address the really important issues that have been raised in this debate .  my lords , 60 years ago , when i was 12 years old , i was prepared for confirmation . in those days , confirmation was taken very seriously . we had to learn the whole catechism by heart and be able to answer the questions in it correctly , in the words of the book of common prayer , not just in our own words . we learnt about the sacraments and what a sacrament was : an outward and visible sign of an inward and spiritual grace . we learned that the two most important sacraments necessary for salvation , ordained by christ himself , were baptism and holy communion . however , there were five other sacraments , not mentioned in the catechism but listed in article 25 of the 39 articles of religion , of which the church seems to have forgotten the existence . they are : confirmation , penance , holy orders , holy matrimony and unction . all these five visible ceremonies have a spiritual dimension .  i contend that it is not within the remit of government or of the european union to interfere with the spiritual concerns of the church . i bounced these beliefs off my friendly local bishop and he agreed with me , but i am not sure whether the right reverend prelates in your lordships ' house do or not .  my lords , like all noble lords , i have received a vast amount of mail on this bill and , because i sit on this side of the house , it is heavily skewed against the bill . i suspect that the other side of the house has been fed vast numbers of letters in favour of the bill . why should it be that people preach to those whom they believe are already converted ? surely we ought to swap our mail to get a proper view of what public opinion is . i have had some mail and some e-mails in favour of the bill . i would say to my noble friend lord dobbs that i recognise the age distinction , but the number of e-mails that i received for and against was very nearly even , so i think that there are some at least middle-aged people who share my views .  i am wasting time ; what i want to come to is this . i was convinced by those letters and e-mails of the genuineness of the hurt felt by the homosexual minority in our society - a hurt which i understand is real . of course , being a minority always generates tensions between the minority and the surrounding majority in both directions . the government have a policy of social cohesion . despite that , they went to their unsuspected ivory tower , looked out of the window , saw the great misty plain of social , political and religious affairs and said , " there is trouble there " . they then went back in again and disappeared from our view , and we imagined that they were making a strategic plan to solve the problem . very soon afterwards , they emerged from the door at the bottom of the tower and said , " we 're going to do something about this " , and hope sprang in our breasts . the task before them was to reconcile the minority and the majority so that there should be equal and mutual trust , confidence and respect between the majority and the minority - between homosexuals and heterosexuals .  however , every single thing that the leaders have done since then seems to have been very cleverly calculated to stoke up the anxieties and mistrust on both sides . from that misty view from which they deduced that there was a problem to solve , did they then go out and inquire or have committees inquire into the situation as it really was and produce reports before they started to legislate ? no ; they came out with a bill . there was predictable uproar because there was no consultation . my noble friend lord mawhinney dealt very ably with that , so i need not repeat it , but i should like to add one grace note to it . in the consultation that they have had , they have studiously avoided certain groups , as i understand from the director of the one people commission of minority churches . he says :  " we note with sadness that not a single black or asian representative was invited to give evidence to the commons committee that looked at the bill " .  even at that late stage , they had not woken up to the need to allay the fears of the people whose fears it is their business to allay . as a result , having started with one offended and anxious minority , they finished up with several dozen simply by ignoring the others .  your lordships have had plenty of theology this evening and do not need any more . we have heard it from real theologians and i have to say that i am carried and persuaded by them , but what really infuriates me is that the bill has been brought forward in a way that has almost certainly doomed it to failure . the legislation may go into place but suspicions and anxieties have been stoked up and increased by the way in which all this has been done . there is a way in which we can go back to the beginning , as the right reverend prelate the bishop of exeter suggested we should , and look for another route , and that is to follow the noble lord , lord dear , into the content lobby on his amendment . that may well trigger the parliament act but the result would be that in the next session the bill would come back to us and it would be open to us either to reject it or to pass it and take it through committee . we would thus give the government the time in between to do some real research and real diplomacy . they could make some real progress towards a harmonious solution and perhaps give the church of england and other churches time to move a little as well . i am with the noble lord .  my lords , i feel honoured to have drawn the short straw of being the last speaker this evening , and i thank all noble lords who are still here for being still here . i did not intend to speak because it seemed that virtually everything there is to be said was being said or was going to be said by someone else . however , i was faced with an enormous volume of letters and e-mails , which i spent a good part of the weekend reading through . i picked up from them some thoughts about the territory which i had not focused on before , and some rather important points were raised .  if there is one single point on which i think this bill should not proceed , it is that the nation is absolutely divided . i do not know whether it is 70% one way or the other or if it is 50/50 , but it is clear that , in the main , the senior part of the country believes in the traditional role of marriage and wishes to keep it , while a lot of younger people think that it is all a load of hooey and ask , basically , why anyone should get married . there is an absolute divide , and in this sort of territory i believe that it is a mistake to push through legislation until there is some form of consensus .  my noble friend lord deben referred amusingly to the gilbert and sullivan line :  " he shall prick that annual blister , arriage with deceased wife 's sister " .  i am not suggesting that it should take 50 years , but it has been a sensible british tradition in social matters to legislate and change gradually , and so keep up with public opinion . in 20 years ' time , when many of us are dead and gone , there may be some form of consensus in the majority of the country - or even before then . it is a great mistake to railroad this extremely unsatisfactory legislation through . the right reverend prelate the bishop of exeter brilliantly pointed out a lot of what is wrong with it . there are other issues that are profoundly wrong and the consultation process was also clearly less than satisfactory .  this is classic territory where it is not unreasonable for the house of lords to exercise its reserve powers in delaying such legislation . our job is to scrutinise and occasionally , when necessary , to be the upholder of public opinion . public opinion is not at all happy with this legislation as it presently stands . many have made the point that there was no electoral mandate , but it was rather the reverse : the prime minister actually stated in a pre-election television interview that he would not be introducing same-sex marriage , and so gave a commitment to the contrary .  as others have pointed out , i regret this issue of a 500 , 00-name petition being treated as a single vote . it was telling that there was not a single black or asian representative invited to give evidence to the commons committee , and their communities are often among the most religious in the country . many may have noticed over the weekend that all the faiths came together - not just the anglican church , but the catholic , muslim , jewish , hindu , sikh and buddhist faiths sent a letter with 53 signatures to the prime minister urging caution and that he should think again before he pushed through this legislation to rewrite the meaning of marriage . in the world of faith , this is not just an anglican issue ; it is fundamental for all faiths , going back into the mists of history , that whether one likes it or not marriage is essentially about a man and woman getting together to have children and to bring them up as securely as possible . just redefining , like that , what marriage means will understandably upset a large number of people . the knock-on effects of the bill have also not been adequately considered . if the bill proceeds , the legal status of gay marriage will be different from that of heterosexual marriage , as the most reverend primate the archbishop of canterbury and the right reverend prelate the bishop of exeter have pointed out . it is also extraordinary that the proposed legislation will not give equality to heterosexual couples wanting a civil partnership , as many others have pointed out .  today 's debate has made it clear that the bill needs more robust protection of religious liberty . the adrian smith trafford housing trust case was a disgrace , but it illustrated what could happen if the bill becomes law , particularly for those in the public sector and the area of teaching . john bowers qc has opined that the bill , combined with the existing law on sex and relationships and the public sector duty , would create a duty to promote and endorse such a new definition of marriage , and that those who expressed their religious views to the contrary would be put on the wrong side of the law . moreover , a teacher declining to teach same-sex marriage could be disciplined . this is entirely unsatisfactory and not an adequate protection of religious liberty .  where has all this come from ? the impetus for redefining the meaning of marriage is not largely from the gay community , many of whom are perfectly happy with civil partnership as crafted a few years ago . it does not come from those with great social concerns either . i think it is the political agenda to abolish all legal differences between the sexes . i challenge the desirability of this agenda , as a point of principle .  many in this house may remember that back in 2004 , when civil partnerships were introduced , the noble lord , lord filkin , as spokesman for the labour government 's then department of constitutional affairs , summarised that government 's position . he said that the " concept " of homosexual marriage ,  " is a contradiction in terms , which is why our position is utterly clear : we are against it , and do not intend to promote it or allow it to take place " . - [  official report   , 11/2/04 ; col . 1094-95 .]  i believe that that remains the view of at least half the country and , as i have said , to railroad through the legislation as it stands , with its legal imperfections , would be exceedingly unwise . for that reason , i will be supporting the motion of the noble lord , lord dear .  my lords , i declare an interest as the honorary president of the scottish bible society and as a member of various christian groups . i thank my noble friend for the way in which he initiated this debate and the bill team for its help in piloting me through the complexities of this legislation . the issues in this debate are extremely important but also extremely sensitive . i intend to confine myself to analysis of certain aspects of the bill as i understand it and , if i am wrong , i invite correction . the principle of the civil partnership act 2004 was to construct a legal relationship as closely as possible to the legal relationship of married couples , and that was successfully achieved . the principle of this bill is to open the institution of marriage to same-sex couples . an institution is more than just a name : it is defined by its purposes and by the conditions under which it may be entered . the institution of marriage exists for the mutual support of the spouses and to provide a suitable environment for the natural procreation of children by the spouses and for their growth and development . it was realised long ago that if spouses were too closely related there was a risk to their children from inbreeding and therefore the prohibited degrees of relationship were laid down under which it was not lawful to marry . the extent of the prohibition has varied over time but it has always included close relationship by blood . so important a purpose is the natural procreation of children in the institution of marriage that the prohibition applied even when the parties were well over the age of childbearing or unable to bear children for other reasons . while the natural procreation of children may be a possibility for a man and a woman , it can never be for a same-sex couple . therefore a union between them , however loving , cannot have this purpose . therefore the union proposed for a same-sex couple must be different from marriage since it cannot have this purpose . non-consummation is not a ground for declaring this union void . a marriage is voidable on the ground of non-consummation , and this implies that it will generally involve sexual intercourse between the parties . there is no such implication in the union proposed in this bill . sexual relations with a person of the same sex as the parties is not expressly mentioned as a ground of divorce here . for all these reasons i conclude that the union open to same-sex couples in the bill is not the institution of marriage but a new and different institution which deserves a name of its own . marriage has developed over the years . no previous development is anything like this . this is not a development ; this is a new creation . the express purpose of the bill is to open the institution of marriage to same-sex couples , including those in a platonic relationship . i am satisfied that the government have done the best that can be done and that no amendment in committee or on report will achieve that purpose . therefore , if the amendment of the noble lord , lord dear , is pressed , i propose to vote for it . i am here because the writ requires my counsel . i know that our constitution allows the elected house , if it wishes , to prevail over my view and that of this house if that is its purpose .  my lords , everything has been said on this subject already ; or nearly everything . i am going to address the house on certain legal consequences of this legislation that i invite the house to consider very carefully . we have been fortunate in this debate to have heard remarkable and telling speeches about homosexual suffering in the past , and then liberation ; about heterosexual culpability for persecution in the past , and then the sense of penitence . these are important sentiments . they describe the feelings of a civilised society , but they are not in themselves the foundations of law . this bill may have a background about love , but we are here to make law . i have three major concerns about this legislation . the first is the manner in which it has come to parliament ; the second is the complexity of the consequences of making same-sex marriages lawful ; and the last is the " what next ? " factor . first , how did we come to the position we are now in ? you would think that legislation based on such controversy , such fundamental disagreement , each side respecting the views of the other , would have required and got extensive preparatory dialogue between government and public , between party and party , and between us in this house . in particular , there should have been pre-legislative scrutiny . the more difficult the bill , the more open the parliamentary process should be . but what has happened here ? in 2004 we passed the civil partnership act after seven days of debate in this house : five in committee , third reading , and report in between . the interests of lesbians and gays were addressed comprehensively . no one at that time , eight or nine years ago , suggested that there should be the kind of legislation that we have before us now . no one suggested then , in this house or the other place , that such legislation was necessary . have matters changed in eight or nine years ? if they have , then how , and why ? what is the difference now ? in 2010 , my party passed major legislation , the equality act . in the spring of that year , section 8 and ancillary provisions dealt with the protected interests of married couples and those in civil partnerships . no one suggested that we should introduce the present type of legislation . if not then , why now ? on both of those occasions , the general picture presented to the public was " this far , and no further " . we are a parliament of the people . we are not a parliament just for the people , paternalistically deciding what the law should be . we should do our best to represent the people 's wish and will as to what the law should be . i do not agree that the differential diagnosis of opinion polls is the basis for objective parliamentary assessment of what the public think . that comes from debate , electoral exposure and inquiry . the noble lord , lord carlile of berriew , says that parliament should lead . have a care , my lords , when you are told that parliament should lead . parliament should serve , and lead in the service of the public . here we are , with no election manifesto to support this change and a tide of history that began in the past 18 months that is described as so overwhelming that we have no choice but to accept it . come now , let us be realistic . this deserves much more careful debate . " we are where we are " , say many , " let us get on with it and do what we can " . if the amendment of the noble lord , lord dear , is not passed , we will face a bill in committee based on clause 1 : same-sex marriages are lawful . the rest of the bill is consequential on that provision . if the bill goes forward and someone calls a vote in committee on whether clause 1 stand part , are we to face the same criticism that that is frustrating the will of the commons , that the lords should get on with revision and not delay or even block it ? i do not accept that . that is effectively preventing the house making a considered decision of its own on the bill . that is not democratic . this is the other place , by the will of a government without mandate to call for such change and to give a free vote to it , creating a new constitutional convention that prevents the house of which we are members making a block . i do not accept that . the second point is the complexity of consequences . overnight and this morning , i have totted up well into double figures the numerous areas where amendments will be required to make this a coherent piece of legislative drafting . i have identified at least five fundamental differences between heterosexual marriage and homosexual marriage . we have to deal with these questions . they cannot be cast aside because we are concerned to satisfy the sentiment so eloquently expressed by so many . we are here to make law . lastly , there is the " what next ? " factor . it is a simple argument to propose that here is a law that says that two people of the same sex can marry because of discrimination . why cannot a third person demand the same right and want to join that union of two to make it a union of three ? that is eminently simple to argue ; it is based on discrimination ; and i invite any subsequent speakers to explain , logically and rationally , why numerical limits overcome profound principles of discrimination , if that is what we are dealing with . polygamy is not just on the same-sex side , it can be on the heterosexual side . next , there are the conscience clauses . i was reassured by the noble lord , lord pannick , and the noble baroness , lady kennedy - reassured , but not convinced . as the noble lord , lord faulks , just pointed out , there are no guarantees in the law . i have learnt after many years in the profession , particularly as its chairman , that we are a profession where individually we repose a great deal of confidence in the value of our own opinions . we are trained so to argue . it would be naive to assume that the problems that have been raised by other barristers will not encounter serious disputation in our courts and in strasbourg . what lies ahead is the unknown . after 2004 , 2010 and 2013 , what will come next ? we were warned that this house should not expose itself to the danger of being involved in a constitutional divide between this chamber and the other chamber . the risk of constitutional division is between parliament and the people . that is what we should avoid . i invite your lordships to remember your responsibilities as legislators . sentiment is important ; it is not determinative .  my lords , it seems a very long time ago , although it was only yesterday , that my noble friend lady stowell of beeston introduced this second reading with her customary clarity , conviction and charm . in her concluding remarks , she acknowledged that same-sex marriage is new and different from what we have known up to now . she said : " the bill simply extends the opportunity " -  simply extends it - to marry to , " all couples who ... desire it for themselves " . - [ official report  , 3/6/13 ; col . 942 .] the bill therefore changes marriage as we have known it but to claim that this is a simple , de minimis matter is to ignore the inevitable consequences that will follow this change . perhaps it is now more clearly understood that marriage has a deep and profound meaning . from time immemorial , among people of all conditions , colours and creeds , marriage has been the solemn , public acknowledgement of the relationship and commitment between a man and a woman so as to legitimise the creation of any child arising from that union and to secure the cohesion and stability of the community in which they live . it is the recognition of that fact which has led the promoters of this bill to include a variety of exceptions to accommodate the reality of any gay-couple partnership seeking marriage . there can be no room for doubt that if this bill becomes law , marriage as we have come to know it will be changed . the noble lord , lord alli , made what i acknowledge to have been a very forceful speech and i compliment him on it . i would like to be able to agree with it , if only for the sake of the harmony i wish to have with my many friends who are gay , but i cannot . he did , however , give extended publicity - he took a lot of trouble to do so and i am grateful to him for it - to the thoughtful and reasoned letter published by the bishop of salisbury . the bishop wrote : " the possibility of ' gay marriage ' does not detract from heterosexual marriage ... indeed the development of marriage for same sex couples is a very strong endorsement of the institution of marriage " . respectfully , and with great diffidence , i disagree . same-sex marriage will detract from heterosexual marriage by signalling that marriage will no longer be about the joining of two people of opposite sexes in a commitment to a procreative institution . the roman catholic bishops ' conference has sent out a publication in which it says : " the fundamental problem with the bill is that changing the legal understanding of marriage to accommodate same sex partnerships threatens subtly , but radically , to alter the meaning of marriage over time for everyone " . as the noble and right reverend lord , lord carey of clifton , said yesterday in his powerful speech , " should this bill pass , marriage as we know it will be weakened and diminished " . - [ official report  , 3/6/13 ; col . 1026 .] we should be warned by what has been happening in other countries which have already made this move . sweden , a notably easy-going country in matters of this kind , has found that marriage counts for very little . i would like to be able to go all the way with those who say we should acknowledge that same-sex couples marrying would be the same as heterosexual couples marrying . i cannot , however , so i go some of the way with the view of the noble and right reverend lord , lord harries of pentregarth , who said that the church of england should find a way of publicly affirming civil partnerships in a christian context . i hope it might find a way of doing that . i pause for a moment and acknowledge what noble lords will recognise as an obvious biological fact : i am old . to some extent , though not entirely , nor to the degree which some of the bill 's enthusiasts would have us subscribe , there is a generational issue here . it is very difficult to discern the attitude of the young . they are understandably preoccupied with the business of getting on with their own life and tackling the many problems they encounter on their way . on the whole , i detect a masterly indifference towards an issue such as this . however , i must be careful not to generalise . today i received an interesting document , sent out by the wilberforce academy - an organisation i confess i had not heard of before - in which it describes itself as , " a new generation of men and women of christian conviction " . it says that , " a new generation is necessary to protect what we have and reclaim what has been lost and determine what the future should be " . it sent out a briefing note on this bill , which concludes : " passing this bill does nothing to support families and the public good and should be rejected " . my main reason for opposing this bill and for being disquieted about its content is its likely impact on children . the values which will influence their own attitudes in life could be influenced by the bill . small children have a need for the warmth and love of their natural mother . boys , as they struggle to find their way in an increasingly competitive and challenging world , need the guidance and sense of values given by their father . all children , of whatever age , benefit from the security , stability and discipline of a loving family home . children experience many pressures in school and these could be made much worse if the sort of material i have seen being prepared by stonewall for use in primary schools ever gains wider usage . it would cause confusion and distress . we need to have answers about the legal position of teachers in schools with their own personal views , and about what can be taught in church schools , as referred to by the right reverend prelate the bishop of exeter in his very profound speech yesterday . i can already foresee battalions of officialdom flexing their muscles at the prospect of fresh opportunities to pursue perceived breaches of political correctness . there is evidence that this is already taking place with a refusal of organisations to accept bookings because they have a pledged commitment to diversity . i conclude by asking the same question that my noble friend lord flight asked at the end of his speech at the conclusion of yesterday 's debate . where has all this come from ? the bill is being bounced on us in a most unseemly way . it has sent shock waves throughout the country , it is damaging , divisive and destructive , and it should have no place on the statute book of this kingdom .  my lords , when the history of our times comes to be written , this debate will be a good example of the seismic shift in social customs that can happen over such a short period as a generation , albeit in this case accelerated by the european convention on human rights . much has been said already , which i would not wish to repeat , but with gay marriage the coalition proposes to alter fundamentally the most important social structure ever known to mankind . the quest for fairness now moves on to demand uniformity . the ramifications of the bill are endless . one can wholly sympathise with the homosexual wish for equivalence and fairness , but how can you make something equal that is inherently different ? you cannot make something that is biologically different the same . it defies common sense . in practice , the redefinition of marriage will be one word with at least two meanings - one acceptable , and the other a muddle to others . many people say that this does not really matter , but equally many other people think that it does matter because it is confusing and , they believe , it weakens the whole nature of parenting and family , a point made to me time and again in the numerous letters that i have received . not only will the word " marriage " be expected in future to cover numerous different sexual relations , but at the same time the terms " husband " and " wife " will lose their current meaning . they will become sexless words . we have already seen this used in this house ; i refer to the marriage and civil partnerships debate of 15 december 2011 . even in spain , the government have changed the words " father " and " mother " to the words " progenitor a " and " progenitor b " . all official documents follow this . under eu pressure , no doubt we will do the same . all this is bound to have a destabilising and confusing effect on children and the existing concept of family . marriage is not just a public expression of love between two people ; it is also the joining together of two families through consanguinity or bloodline . by its nature , homosexual marriage can never do this . consanguinity and procreation are the two deeply underlying structures that exist in marriage - the union between two families , two tribes , two dynasties , that are linked by their bloodline thereafter for mutual support and protection , to give security and succour to their members . still today in india you will hear people say , " my grandchildren are my pension " . when beveridge introduced the welfare state , he foresaw that the national form of social security might well undermine the family . he was right . we increasingly see the state taking over family care , looking after grandfathers and grandmothers in their dotage , rather than it being the duty of the offspring . as our nation 's ability to fund the welfare state comes increasingly into question and above all shows itself up as a hideously expensive substitute for our fractured western families , it is surely inappropriate at this time to weaken the nature of marriage and the family , which have always been the bedrock of society . every bit of modern research emphasises that children with stable family backgrounds are naturally advantaged . this should be encouraged by the state in every possible way . teachers report that they are having to cope with children who are confused and have no natural sense of right and wrong , and find this a growing problem . the familial framework must be supported . there will come a time when the state cannot cope , and that might come sooner than we think . fifty years ago , those who criticised christ were persecuted ; today , those who promote christ are prosecuted . whatever the outcome of today 's debate , we must look for stronger safeguards that implement the deeply held traditional views of those who cannot accept change . we need the sort of legal protection given to conscientious objectors in the last war , which was fought to allow the very freedoms of expression and thought that are under attack today . the consequences of the bill could be profoundly damaging . if you mix up values and edges are no longer defined , it is like mixing many paints together ; the end result is a dull , amorphous and confusing moral mess . the wider concept of family and marriage must be protected and clearly defined . these timeless institutions , the structure of every civilisation to date , should be reinforced , and we must be very careful not to harm them . for that reason , i will vote for the amendment .  my lords , in the 36 or so years that i have been in your lordships ' house i have come across many bills from all quarters of the house with which i have profoundly disagreed . but none has made me as uneasy - and i use that word deliberately - as this one . the government and others say that it is popular , but a great many of the people i know - and much more widely , and also among those who are long-term supporters of the government - despair that such a measure should be brought forward . that is because the bill goes to the very heart of individuals ' personal and deeply held views about what marriage is . as the noble baroness , lady kennedy of the shaws , said yesterday , and my noble friend lord eden of winton said just now , perhaps these views vary because of differences in age . marriage is a unique bond , as important in a non-religious connection as it is in a religious covenant . despite the safeguards for the religious aspects of marriage contained within the bill , one of the key views was expressed to me by the scottish episcopal bishop of aberdeen and orkney , someone well versed in the overall nature of marriage , whether religious or otherwise , as i sought to organise my own thoughts about this debate . it is a view which i share . it is that the heart of marriage features both the complementarity as well as the difference between men and women . it cannot do that between those of the same sex whether or not deeply religious views are held . as others have expressed over the past two days , marriage is a vital , life-giving institution in our society . it has evolved in its current form through a long and complex process , as the noble viscount , lord colville of culross , explained . it is an institution which recognises the complementarity and the difference between the sexes . marriage offers a framework of stability for this and , when properly lived , has been proven to do so . if one considers its ingredients , perhaps early on comes the simple fact of companionship . all of us who have been married learn over time that to make a marriage sustainable it needs hard work , give and take , forgiveness and many other aspects . that is well known to those who have been married for many years . however , there are other types of companionship relationships : caring for an aged parent , siblings living together when they are older , coping with a sibling or friend with a disability , and so on . there are also those who are simply friends and perhaps share a property . these might all be examples of great dependency and , indeed , interdependence , so might there be a case for same-sex marriage to be argued on a basis of mutual companionship ? perhaps , but it is hardly conclusive as none of these other companion relationships requires a marriage bond for them to work beneficially . what about children ? of course people of the same sex can nurture children , but they cannot create them . it is the stability and complementarity of different sexes in a marriage that forms the bedrock of a child 's early years . is it not the case that the current movement towards same-sex marriages comes not just from a given equality perspective but because of a mistaken desire for institutionalised recognition within a time honoured structure ; namely , marriage ? i would argue , as have others , that marriage and the special meaning that the word conveys is not the means by which this should happen . in a same-sex marriage there simply is not the complementarity and difference that there is between a man and a woman that forms part of its essential structure and character . indeed , it is the word " marriage " within this bill that creates the problem to some , including me . whereas it is the foot-of-the-door argument for those who endorse its purpose , to many , unwittingly , it seems to uproot the significance of marriage for those who think differently . it is true , as the government have argued in introducing the bill , that the means by which the marriage bond has been recognised over centuries has changed and has evolved into a quite sophisticated legal contract , to say nothing of the religious covenant it is now . if marriage stands for stability through complementarity and difference between the sexes , then same-sex marriage cannot become that which it seeks to be . furthermore , it risks destabilising an institution that at its heart honours stability . high expectations are therefore placed on those who enter into the marriage bond , and those within it should model or , at the very least , aspire and work towards the ideals of faithfulness and security which society requires for its stable balance . i would not dream of suggesting that faithful and secure modelling of a relationship between people of the same sex in civil partnerships does anything other than add to the well-being of society . indeed , it seems to me that civil partnerships provide all that is necessary for same-sex partnerships . the point i want to emphasise is that no relationship between those of the same sex can equal or match that complementarity and difference to which i referred earlier which is found in marriage . it cannot create another human being , and that is what differentiates , and always should do , civil partnership from marriage . it seems to me , and to a great many others to whom i have spoken , provoked no doubt by this bill and the huge amount of mail that it has generated , that there is a manifest and meaningful difference between marriage and all other forms of relationship ; that marriage should remain as it is , a bond of faithfulness and security , however difficult to achieve , but always to aspire to , legally binding and perhaps religiously covenanted , between a man and a woman . a civil partnership can continue to enjoy the brand of complementarity that its own circumstances brings , one hopes to the well-being of society . but marriage it most certainly is not and it cannot be made so . i therefore believe that this bill is fundamentally wrong and is likely to do considerable damage to , or certainly put at risk , a much respected part of the way society works and achieve nothing for same-sex partners that cannot be achieved already . it turns an aspect of society 's norms and values on its head and changes the well understood and accepted meaning of the word marriage in perpetuity . i fear for the future of family life if this bill is passed . i shall certainly vote for the amendment .  my lords , we have just had a telling and detailed explanation of the road that we have travelled in getting equality for lesbian , gay and gender-transmuted people . we are certainly sad to hear that there is so much persecution going on . the only thing that one can say is that legislation is now in place that should deter that . i am very grateful for all the briefings that we have received from all around on different aspects of the bill . once again , this house has provided a forum for an incredibly varied and passionate debate . it has incorporated the wisdom and experience of people from a great range of backgrounds and philosophies , and the passion with which each of those is held can be judged by the number of members who have wanted to speak . the government claim to have consulted adequately , but our postbags reveal a wide unease about the effect of the bill . unfortunately , the purpose of the bill can be read only as removing traditional christian connotation from the concept of marriage in the law of the country . some might regard that as a marvellous gesture towards multiculturalism , but the response of the noble lord , lord singh of wimbledon , yesterday and those of other faiths does not support that . considering the way in which the christian religion has inspired and shaped our culture and constitution , i would regard the bill as a major departure introducing many pitfalls , some of which were outlined by the noble lord , lord dear . i feel that the confusion starts at the outset in that neither the bill nor the statute law of england or scotland defines marriage . we have relied on common law and the criteria and practice of the churches . the noble lord , lord pannick , has outlined the way in which many of the parameters have changed , but up to this time marriage has not required a legal definition because there has been an historical consensus about its meaning . this bill is a proposal to do away with the historical consensus and introduce a new meaning . this was laid out more eloquently than i could in the speech yesterday of the right reverend prelate the bishop of exeter . it has also been voiced to me as a concern by the scottish law society . if we have to go down this road , a bill introducing a new concept of marriage should state clearly what its definitions and requirements are for any and all of the parties . for me , another difficulty lies in the determination that there can be no difference between a heterosexual union and a homosexual union in law and that , once legislated for in statute , locks can be put in place that can ensure that the law will be able to treat the two categories differently . surely that must be a target for constant challenge and can be considered as viable only in the short term . like my noble friend lord waddington , i regard it as of some consequence that only nine years ago we went to great pains to pass a viable civil partnership act and to ensure that those taking on a committed same-sex relationship should be able to benefit from the same civil recognition and tax arrangements as those in a conjugal union . he mentioned the official view of the then government spokesman that this contained all that was necessary to satisfy equality . as we have come to this bill , i noticed that on 5 february the opposition spokesman in the other place re-emphasised that , " civil partnerships are different " . she went on to say : " it is right that we now take the additional step of introducing equal marriage " . - [ official report  , commons , 5/2/13 ; col . 134 .] if that was so firmly ruled out nine years ago , what reliance can we put on politicians and legal interpretations taking the same view on the differentiations and locks that they are so sure about today ? even the triple locks , such as they are , seem to be targeted to protect only religious officials , organisations and buildings . as my noble friend lord tebbit mentioned , one of the responses that we have received is from a part-time chaplain to a local police force in strathclyde - not a post that would be protected by the proposed measures - who has already been dismissed because on his private blog he said he was in favour of traditional marriage . have the government considered what might be needed to protect religious individuals who merely want to exercise their own freedom of speech and freedom of religion by expressing their favour for one kind of marriage or another ? for these reasons , many who have spoken wish to ask the government to think again , and to produce a bill that more adequately addresses the needs of the country . if the noble lord , lord dear , calls his division , i will support him .  my lords , this has been a difficult and challenging debate - on occasions even an emotional one - for many of us as we have listened to all the speeches . to take a position that is not in support of this bill is not to be homophobic , although some might accuse us of it . we have a duty to do all we can to further equal treatment , to challenge homophobic behaviour and to celebrate difference and diversity . this bill is a very uncertain instrument , but one thing is clear : it will change the definition and understanding of marriage , converting it into two different institutions . as has been said previously , it is not the outcome of a manifesto commitment , of a referendum , of a green paper , of a white paper and of normal consultation . in the 126 letters in my postbag yesterday , 120 were against this bill and six were for it . one thing that was articulated repeatedly in those letters - they were not standard form letters ; people had sat down and thought this out - was that the government had not gone through the normal processes in approaching this matter . they simply issued a consultation on how marriage could be opened up to same-sex couples . as we come to the end of this debate , we need to remind ourselves why we have legislative provision for marriage at all and why the state intervenes in people 's sexual relations . bertrand russell said : " but for children , there would be no need of any institution concerned with sex " . let us think a minute about english law , under which a valid marriage is one man one woman , is a lifelong commitment , has an exclusive sexual aspect and has a presumption that the husband is the father of the wife 's child and that the partners will remain loyal to one another . normally , marriage involves being open to bringing children into the world and provides a legal context within which stability , care and protection can be provided for them . marriage has been protected in law for that reason and , as others have said , it provides the basis for our complex inheritance laws . it is not just a matter of domestic law . article 12 of the european convention protects the right of a man and woman to marry . article 23 on the international covenant on civil and political rights recognises the family as , " the natural and fundamental group unit of society ... entitled to protection by society and the state " , involving , " the right of men and women of marriageable age to marry and to found a family " , and implying , in principle , the possibility to procreate and live together . if parliament enacts this bill , the content must be clear and unequivocal . it must leave no uncertainties capable of resolution only through the courts , often at great expense and distress to those involved . the government stated in december that : " at its heart , marriage is about two people who love each other making a formal commitment to each other " . under english law , marriage is rather more complex than this . what is proposed will result in two different types of union that will bear the same name : marriage . the first will involve traditional legal marriage between a man and a woman . the second , legal marriage between same-sex partners , will be significantly different from opposite-sex marriage . non-consummation will not be a ground on which such a marriage can be declared void . there will be no presumption that a child born to the family is a child of the family , and sexual infidelity with another same-sex partner will not constitute adultery . the formal proposed legal relationships of married same-sex couples cannot therefore be construed as being identical to those of married opposite-sex couples . there will be different consequences , not only for the couple but for any child who may be born to such a relationship . it is not unequal , unfair or discriminatory to treat those in different circumstances differently . european law gives state authorities a wide margin of appreciation in deciding where to strike the balance between convention rights . in 2012 , the european court stated that there is no discrimination in excluding same-sex couples from marriage . i want to move on to a number of questions for the minister . can she advise whether a member of a same-sex marriage whose partner has a sexual relationship with a member of the opposite sex will be able to divorce that partner for adultery , which goes to the heart of the commitment to faithfulness , as is the case for those in opposite-sex marriages ? can she also advise why the two types of marriage proposed are treated differently in the bill , something that surely might ultimately give rise to action in the courts ? if a wife in a same-sex marriage does not have the advantage of a presumption - we understand why - that a child whom she bears is a child of the marriage , what protections will exist for that child in law ? if a same-sex marriage does not have to be consummated , surely a partner in an opposite-sex marriage who wishes to remain married to his or her partner despite the fact that the marriage has never been consummated would have the right to bring a challenge in the european court against the government for discrimination in not according to them the protections afforded to those in same-sex marriages . there might be significant financial implications for a party married to someone who declines to consummate the marriage but is in all other respects a model spouse . under english law , religious marriages conducted in accordance with the law are also civil marriages . there are not two kinds of marriage . rather , marriage may be contracted either through a religious ceremony , without the requirement that exists in other european countries for a separate civil marriage , or a civil ceremony . a number of churches , including representatives of the church of england , have articulated uncertainties about attempts at compulsion that may be brought to bear if the bill is enacted . might some churches , reluctant to face the uncertainties and costs inherent in the possibility of third-party action against the united kingdom in the european courts , simply decide that they will no longer act as registrars of marriages , so that couples will have to have a civil wedding as well as a religious wedding to have a legally valid marriage ? what assessments have been made of the potential costs of any consequential necessity to employ additional registrars of marriage ? it has been argued that a religious marriage involves a civil element that incorporates the provision of a public function . where a church has stated that it will not marry same-sex couples , could it therefore be argued in the european court that the uk is in breach of the non-discrimination laws applicable here and in europe ? there has been significant concern in many quarters about the effectiveness of the so-called quadruple lock . there are those who also object to the fact that there is no discretion for the church of england to determine whether it wishes to marry same-sex couples . questions also arise about what might happen where an institution determines that it will not conduct same-sex marriages but a minister of that institution decides that , in conscience , he wishes to do so . the fact that the minister has conducted the marriage in defiance of his institution 's determination might be a disciplinary matter for the institution , but will the marriage be valid for the couple concerned , and how will they know ? clause 2(2) allows individuals to refuse to conduct a same-sex marriage even though organisations have opted in . there is no corresponding protection , as has been said , for many others who provide services in the context of marriage . the government consulted on whether civil partnerships should be extended to opposite-sex couples . of those who responded , 61% thought they should . it has been said that a requirement to declare a civil partnership is in effect a requirement to declare sexual orientation . opening civil partnerships to opposite-sex couples would remove this automatic interpretation of sexual orientation . will the minister explain why the government have decided to maintain this discriminatory situation and provide assurances that the european court will uphold the right of the state to retain gender inequality in civil partnerships when they have legislated for equal marriage ? statutory guidance requires that children learn about the nature of marriage and its importance for family and the bringing up of children . in the widened definition of marriage provided for in this bill , there would be no exception for conscientious or religious belief : rather , there will be a duty on a teacher to promote positively marriage as newly defined . a teacher could be disciplined for conveying a belief against same-sex marriage in a way that a pupil might regard as discriminatory . finally , marriage receives modest support from government in the form , for example , of assistance for marriage counselling . excluding same-sex couples from marriage counselling would be discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation . the exceptions under the equality act 2010 do not apply to an organisation whose purpose is to provide services to a wider public constituency . such organisations could be unable to access ongoing funding and might have to close . there is significant difficulty in accessing marriage counselling across england and wales , given the long waiting lists . how do the government propose to protect the ongoing provision of such services ? i was much impressed by the words of the most reverend primate the archbishop of canterbury when he suggested yesterday that the better way would be to create a new and valued institution alongside marriage to strengthen us all . we have a duty to legislate in a way that gives certainty . despite the government 's intention , the bill cannot , as drafted , provide equality . it also appears to have been the subject of hasty drafting that does not deal comprehensively with far too many issues .  my lords , i will speak very briefly in the gap , of which i have given notice . i think i am entitled to four minutes , which is the time people in the other place - the elected members - had to talk on a matter of this importance . i am usually at one with my noble friend lord norton of louth , but when he says that it is up to us to decide i say no , it is not . we can make laws , but they have to carry consent . next week it will be 30 years since i was first elected to the other place . i have never known a measure - not even the poll tax - that has produced such division and concern on both sides of the argument . it is important that we take account of that . what worries me about the bill is the speed with which it has been whisked through the house of commons and is now being whisked through here . i am told that we are going to be allowed two days in committee . as the noble lord , lord brennan , pointed out , the civil partnership bill had far more than that - i think it had five days in committee . the idea that we can deal with a matter of this importance in two days in committee when we have had two days on second reading is ridiculous . what is the haste ? what is forcing the pace of this matter ? on the letters and e-mails we have had , i acknowledge that some people who have written have used quite offensive terms . one of the qualities of the debate that we have had so far in this house has been the civilised and respectful way in which we have listened to the arguments . i would have preferred the house of commons to have dealt with this matter in the normal way , as we have done on other controversial issues : a private member 's bill , with the government providing time , and with a committee of the whole house . instead , we had a committee which was stacked and a guillotine - and , by the way , we had a manifesto commitment to end the automatic timetabling of bills . this bill , above all others , should not have been subject to a timetable motion . in this house we are now faced with the question which i want to address . i will be supporting the amendment in the name of the noble lord , lord dear , because the house of commons needs to think again . it needs to produce a white paper or a green paper , and the public need to be involved in this discussion so that it carries consent . at the end of the day , consent is the most important thing . listening to the debate in this house , and to the right reverend prelate , i believe that consensus can be achieved , but the bill is no way to achieve it . the bill was certainly not a manifesto commitment . my noble friend says that it does not matter . yes , it does . if it had been , it would have been quite wrong for us to vote for the amendment in the name of the noble lord , lord dear . this house is entitled to vote for the noble lord 's amendment because the house of commons has not had an opportunity properly to consider it , and indeed , the bill would not have come to this place had a deal not been done by the labour front bench with the government to support the bill in return for a commitment to consider whether civil partnerships should be extended to heterosexual couples . that is a very important measure that could be taken , but we are told that it is very complicated , it will take a very long time , and they need that time . this is very complicated as well . we are entitled to vote for the amendment in the name of the noble lord , lord dear , and i shall do so , because the process by which this bill has been handled is inappropriate , and has left the country divided , bewildered and puzzled by something that has come out of a blue sky . that is not a proper way in which to make such a major social reform .  my lords , this has been a long and tiring debate , and one that has been a privilege in which to participate . i thank all members of your lordships ' house who have spoken , and in particular those who have offered such steadfast support to me , both before and during the debate . i am very grateful . as has just been confirmed , this is a free vote , and peers across the house have supported my amendment . all of them recognise that it should not be a matter for party politics but a matter of principle . it is interesting how in the course of this fascinating debate , over two days , the thrust of the debate , or the tide for and against , flowed backwards and forwards . last night , the first half of that session was more or less in balance , while the second half of last night was discernibly running in my favour , as it were , and today the tide has turned and is running the other way . i make no criticism of that ; it is the random way in which the speakers list is put together . certainly , all of us agree that this is an issue of profound interest and importance and one that will affect every member of our society . we cannot escape the fact that the bill will completely alter the concept of marriage as we know it . the most reverend primate the archbishop of canterbury and the right reverend prelates , the bishop of leicester , the bishop of chester and the bishop of exeter , the noble and right reverend lord , lord carey of clifton , and the noble lord , lord singh of wimbledon , all explained their opposition to the bill and the detailed practical and theological reasons that underpin their stance . in the debate over the past two days , it appears to be an accepted fact that the process of the bill was seriously and unusually flawed . nobody has really challenged those facts , and i comment very briefly on them because they have been repeated several times already . it is useful to remember that there was no proper consultation or green or white paper . there was no manifesto or pre-legislative scrutiny . the government consultation procedure was , frankly , a mockery , and the result was rigged , because whichever way you look at it the vote was 83% against the bill . it was heavily constrained in its passage through the house of commons , with some serious doubts about the process . here in your lordships ' house our debate strangely never came to real grips with the consequences of the bill should it become law . there was very little examination or comment about the major issues of employment , education , freedom of conscience or the rights and well-being of children , save the one intervention that i noted from the noble lord , lord eden of winton . neither was very much time spent on the inevitable impact on the existing legal framework . all we knew for sure was that the government had admitted that the impact on existing legislation would require at least 8 ,000 amendments . the noble baroness , lady thornton , has just tried to put that into context . i hope noble lords will agree with my very unusual procedure of quoting five lines from my opening remarks yesterday , which can be found in col . 947 of hansard . i reflected on the fact that the last country to change the law as we seek to do was argentina , two years ago , and the results are just becoming apparent . a valued commentator in that country said this : " it quickly became clear that legalising same-sex marriage required a revolution to our internal law . it impacted laws regulating public order , identity , gender , rules of kinship , filiation , marriage , names , marital property arrangements , divorce , alimony , parental rights , succession , domestic violence , adoption , artificial reproductive techniques , surrogate motherhood , liberty of conscience , criminal law , tax law and employment law , among other topics " . - [official report , 3/6/13 ; col . 947 .] whether there are 8 ,000 or 800 amendments , that is the sort of change that we must expect as a result of the change in this law . the major part of the debate that we have had here focused , perhaps unsurprisingly , on aspects of love and acceptance - and who , really , can deny the importance of that ? the homosexual community is very small numerically but is none the less just as important and seeks society 's affirmation and social acceptability , which it claims would come from access to , and inclusion in , marriage as we know it . civil partnerships already give legal equality , as we know ; what is now being sought is social inclusivity . i , like many others in your lordships ' house , was moved by the speeches of , for example , the noble lords , lord browne of belmont , lord smith of finsbury , and lord black of brentwood , and the noble baroness , lady barker . their ability to speak as they did , and that those views can be accepted in public , was refreshing and commendable . i have been one of many who have helped in some small way to further the steady growth of full integration of homosexuals into society from a position of illegality , through a phase of tolerance , if you like , into full recognition and acceptability . i am also aware of the very large number of others in society who recognise the huge change that is being sought by this bill . balancing the understandable fears and wishes of the majority against the understandable demands of a small minority is a difficult task , but in their haste to force this bill through parliament the government will not satisfy either group . the noble lord , lord alderdice , spoke convincingly of the dangers of forcing legislation on to the statute book without wide consultation and carrying all shades of public opinion with it . i wholeheartedly agree and have cited the current situation in france as one example . there seems to be , if not general agreement , certainly some agreement that the bill is in a mess , ill thought through and without proper process or popular mandate . the noble lord , lord dannatt , went so far as to say that the progress of the bill has to date been tantamount to an abuse of process . he might well be right . some argue that it should pass second reading and be ameliorated in committee . we all know that it is constitutionally proper to force a vote at second reading . there are precedents for doing so , the most recent being the health and social care bill only two years ago . we know that such a move was endorsed by the 2006 joint committee on conventions and i recognise and endorse the usual approach in your lordships ' house to taking care and time to examine a bill in detail , but not on this occasion . the structure of the bill is too bad for that and i am certainly not alone in that view . a battery of big guns in your lordships ' house agreed with me that the bill is so fatally flawed that it is incapable of sensible amendment and should be voted down now and sent back to the drawing board . yesterday , the noble marquess , lord lothian , the noble lords , lord naseby , lord framlingham , lord tebbit , lord mawhinney , lord waddington , and lord anderson of swansea , and others - all parliamentarians widely experienced in both houses - supported the move to vote the bill down now . we have heard the same today from the noble and learned lord , lord mackay of clashfern , the noble lord , lord brennan , and - in his short intervention - the noble lord , lord forsyth of drumlean . it might be a bold move - it probably is - but it is legitimate , it has a precedent and it is appropriate . who is prepared to drive a steamroller over the address given by the noble lord , lord brennan , himself at one time chairman of the bar , who asked a series of questions about what the next factors are , whether we should dwell solely on emotion and avoid questions of law , and particularly the fact that clause 1 of the bill gives no room for negotiation or manoeuvre when it gets to committee . all the might of government has been thrown at this bill . every corner has been cut , yet it is ill constructed and does not have the stamp of democratic legitimacy . perhaps i may close in posing a few fundamental questions ? are noble lords sure that the process has been properly handled ? are they sure that the bill has democratic legitimacy ? are they sure that all the likely consequences have been thought through - remember argentina ? are they sure that we know everything about the legal effects of the bill ? are they sure that there will be no later attempts to widen the definition of marriage further , and are they happy for another government on another occasion to ram a different bill through in this way ? if not this bill , when would noble lords vote against a bill at second reading ? if some of the answers are in the negative , i suggest that we vote the bill down now and not waste further parliamentary time on it . i suggest that we send it back for proper , mature research , consultation and debate about the whole institution of marriage , taking into account , if you like , civil partnerships for both heterosexuals and homosexuals , because the issue is too important for all sections of society , gay or straight , to be introduced on a whim and handled in so cavalier a fashion . how can we refuse a second reading ? rather , i ask noble lords : how can we allow it to proceed ? i ask your lordships to agree my amendment and , in doing so , i beg leave to test the opinion of the house .  my lords , this amendment is partly probing and partly to do with language , and it may have some constitutional overtones . i have tabled it for discussion because i believe that it is not the business of government or of parliament to change by legislation the long accepted meaning of words . as has already been said , the proposed change recalls alice in wonderland or , indeed , orwell's newspeak . certainly the meaning of words evolves , and sometimes changes direction almost completely . this , however , does not justify changing known meanings by law . to do so undermines confidence in all generally accepted meanings . it devalues language and the honesty of spoken and written meanings . on those grounds , i appeal to the government and those behind the bill to have second thoughts . i should say something about the word " union " in my amendment . it is a strong and honourable word . for example , the union between scotland , england and wales has been a strong one , originally uniting the crowns and later the parliaments of the two countries . i trust that it will not end in divorce . the united states has similarly stood the test of time and survived a terrible civil war . even the union of soviet socialist republics produced a strong central power capable of threatening the rest of the world . i said at second reading that civil partnership should be regarded as an honourable estate or status . i take the same view of unions between two persons of the same sex . another speaker in that debate suggested that " espousal " would be appropriate to describe the intentional coming together of two men or two women . i suggest that such an expression is a little archaic and may not convey permanence or lifelong qualities . i submit that " union " is a better and stronger word and has wholly honourable connotations . to have two different words to describe two very different kinds of relationship would be far clearer . it would also make things far more straightforward for teachers , parents and others who have to explain relationships to young people . if " union " had appeared in the bill here instead of " marriage " , the government would have saved themselves a great deal of trouble . they would not have been faced with a petition from more than 650 ,000 people . they would not have aroused deep fears and anxieties throughout all parts of england and wales , as we saw from the huge volume of letters sent to members of both houses . the conservative party would not have alienated many of their natural supporters . traditionally defined marriage had and has a sacramental character in many of the great religions . leaving that point aside , it has represented the coming together of two families with their histories and traditions , and embraces the widest possible set of relationships surrounding and supporting the married couple and the children of their begetting . this is something immensely valuable that we should not risk devaluing . we should seek to avoid the problems beginning to re-emerge in countries that have thus far legislated for same-sex marriage . i offer the amendment to your lordships and the country in the hope of stimulating new and constructive thought . i beg to move .  my lords , i went to the public bill office last week to table this very amendment , only to find that the noble lord , lord hylton , had beaten me to it . i therefore , of course , added my name to the amendment and was very glad to do so . a couple of weeks ago we had an extremely moving debate , with some powerful speeches on both sides . i am bound to say that the result of that debate did not clearly reflect the division . i would much rather that we had not had a division because i know that a lot of colleagues voted for constitutional reasons , believing that it was not right to seek to vote down something on second reading that had received such a large majority in another place . yet i know from many personal conversations with colleagues in all parts of the house that there is deep concern and real unease about calling same-sex relationships " marriage " . i detected a strong feeling in the house during that debate that same-sex relationships should be accorded a higher status than civil partnerships allow . it was implicit in the speech of the most reverend primate the archbishop of canterbury , and it was certainly explicit in mine and in a number of others , that there should be a new definition for same-sex relationships which goes profoundly beyond civil partnerships and the civil privileges that that arrangement brings . a number of us referred to " union " , which the noble lord , lord hylton , has clearly defined in his speech . like him , i regard this amendment as a probing one . indeed , i hope there will not be any votes during committee on this bill . this house is at its best when it reflects on the committee stage and then votes , where appropriate , on report . i certainly would not wish to press this amendment to any division today , and i gather from what the noble lord , lord hylton , said that he would not wish that . however , i say to noble lords in all parts of the committee that surely we can find it within us to come up with a definition which gives to those who want to make a lifelong commitment to a same-sex relationship the same thing which marriage gives to heterosexual couples . as became clear during the debate a fortnight ago , there are differences that cannot be eradicated by the change of a name . the union between two men or two women can never be the same , in actuality or potential , as the union between a man and a woman . we all have to give and take in a debate of this nature . i would not only be content with , but would welcome , my church - the church of england - blessing same-sex unions , and therefore giving them a recognition and permanence that they do not currently enjoy . i ask friends in all parts of the house who are themselves gay - a number made very moving and powerful speeches in the last debate - to recognise that there is a strong feeling in this country that the relationship between a man and a woman is marriage and should remain marriage , and that we should look for some other definition beyond civil partnership for same-sex relationships . whether there is a majority or not for that i do not know ; only a referendum would tell . it is in that spirit , which i hope is one of understanding and tolerance , that i commend this amendment to your lordships' house , and hope that we can discuss it and perhaps come back to it on report . i cannot speak for the noble lord , lord hylton , but for my part , if another word was preferred to " union " i would not object at all . " union " is a good word - an honourable word of long estate - but something that can and should be seriously considered by your lordships' house . with those few words , i strongly support what the noble lord , lord hylton has said .  my lords , i did not speak at second reading , but i found myself in agreement with almost all those who spoke against the bill . in particular i agreed with the speech of the most reverend primate the archbishop of canterbury . my noble friend lord quirk also made a short and very effective speech . like other noble lords , i have received well over 100 letters from those who feel very strongly about the bill ; indeed , some have written to me more than once . they differ from the sorts of letters one gets on these occasions in that they are all clearly written from the heart . equally , there are those who feel strongly the other way . i have received only a few letters from them . i do not know why there should be so few compared with the great mass of letters on the other side , but i have great sympathy with their views . what has been missing in all this has been any attempt to find some sort of compromise between the two positions ; in other words , a way of giving the gay community what it so obviously desires , without destroying the meaning of the word " marriage " . it seems like many weeks since i received a booklet which does exactly that . it is issued by respublica and written by professor roger scruton . it is extremely well argued and , in my view , provides exactly the sort of compromise that is needed . i do not think it was mentioned on a single occasion at second reading , but it should have been . it was with great joy , when i arrived in the house half an hour ago , that i found an amendment tabled in the name of my noble friend lord hylton and the noble lord , lord cormack , expressing exactly the view which i would have expressed if i had spoken at second reading . i have not had time to develop the argument in support of the amendment but , with your lordships' permission , i will read just one short paragraph from the respublica british civic life document , which is entitled marriage : union for the future or contract for the present : " to the churches , we recommend that they recognise that the demand for same sex marriage comes from a serious desire for permanent loving homosexual relationships to be recognised and embraced by society , by christianity and by other faith groups . the demand for secular marriage equality is in part an appeal for religious acceptance , which the government's proposals cannot offer . we believe the churches should consider offering not civil partnerships but civil unions " -  exactly what this amendment proposes -  " to same sex couples a celebration and a status that recognises a transition from partnership into permanence . and the churches and other faith groups should therefore grant civil partnerships a religious celebration and recognition making them a civil union . churches should recognise not just that homosexual persons are as they are , but they also are owed recognition of the permanent relationships they choose " . it is for those reasons that i will support this amendment as strongly as i can and hope that it will at least be considered by the government .  my lords , at second reading i suggested that the term for a same-sex marriage might be " espousal " , but i accept the point made by the noble lord , lord hylton , that it is an archaic or anachronistic word . i also said at second reading that i intended to sound out the house on whether there would be much support for that nomenclature , and now i have to say that there was not sufficient support for me to feel that bringing it forward at this stage would be the right thing to do . the reason that i want to persist in the suggestion that there should be a different word for same-sex unions is largely to do with reconciliation . this measure has excited more public interest and reaction than any other measure that i can recollect in recent times , and there is undoubtedly a widespread feeling among a large mass of our fellow citizens - decent people who are not remotely driven by prejudice - that , as the noble lord , lord cormack , and i said at second reading , there is a fundamental physical difference between the two unions . it is not a difference either of status or esteem ; nor a difference of stability or love , but none the less , it is a fundamental difference . what is quite interesting is that a number of the letters i have received have taken me up on the point that not all heterosexual unions have procreative potential . if a couple are coming together aged 96 , there is not likely to be procreative potential . the same goes if one of the couple is unfortunately sterile . however , that escapes the point that same-sex unions can never have procreative potential . those who support using exactly the same language will ask , " what's the point ; what's the difference ; what are you trying to do ? " . all i am trying to do is to reconcile the bulk of this country to this important , evolutionary change in our law . i sincerely believe that refusing to compromise in the matter of nomenclature would be a big mistake . after this measure has become law , we do not want a rumbling continuance of objection which could conceivably crystallise and increase . i am , therefore , still in favour of a different word . i would be willing to accept " union " which the noble lord , lord hylton , suggested , though i would prefer the word " matrimony " , proposed in amendment 46 - which is part of this group - in the name of the noble lord , lord armstrong of ilminster . so i hope that we can find a compromise that will give honour to both sides - if i can call them that - although there are infinite shades of grey between the two extremes . the marquess of lothian : my lords , i strongly support what my noble friend lord phillips of sudbury has said . in my speech at second reading , i said that there is a great difference between a definition in law and the real meaning of words . this is one that troubles me considerably . i agree with him that amendment 46 , in the name of the noble lord , lord armstrong of ilminster , suggests a way forward particularly because the word " matrimony " in the oxford english dictionary derives from the latin word " mater " , which means " mother " , and therefore has the meaning of children related to it . whether or not a marriage produces children is , in a sense , irrelevant . the meaning of the word is there , and it is there for a particular purpose . i have found it very difficult to work out the best word to use . i have problems with the equal use of the word " marriage " . i personally believe that marriage is between a man and a woman and , although i shall certainly obey the law , whatever it says , i shall never cease to believe that . whatever we do in terms of same-sex marriages , we are not creating the same meaning , but a legal definition which will be applicable in this country and in this country only . we could be creating enormous problems of definition if , for example , a couple who , believing that they were married under this piece of legislation , were to go to another country which did not accept that definition of marriage - and russia comes to mind , given what its parliament did the other day . i hope that the government will look closely at this to see whether there is a way of finding a distinction between what i call " real marriage " ; what in some amendments is called " traditional marriage " ; and what my noble friend lord cormack has called " union " . i am not sure that any of these words is quite correct , but i think we need to ensure that when this legislation is through , rather than continuing to have this divisive and abrasive distinction , we can have two definitions which can live happily alongside each other . in the course of debating this legislation , i hope we will come to that conclusion .  my lords , as both the noble lord , lord phillips , and the noble marquess , lord lothian , referred to amendment 46 , which is in my name , i will take this opportunity to speak to it . the bill reminds me irresistibly of humpty dumpty , as other noble lords have said it does them . your lordships will remember that , from his seat on the wall , humpty dumpty said to alice : " when i use a word , it means just what i choose it to mean - neither more nor less " . a little later , he said : " you see it's like a portmanteau - there are two meanings packed up into one word " . i should not of course think of casting the prime minister , with his many other qualities , as humpty dumpty but i am sure that the noble baroness , lady stowell , and her colleagues will not have forgotten humpty dumpty's fate . sitting on his wall , he failed to assess the risk of falling off it and had a nasty accident . unfortunately , he could not be saved , even though the military were called upon in aid of the civil power . the bill would change the meaning of the word " marriage " , which has hitherto denoted a loving and lifelong commitment between a man and a woman , often - although as the noble lord , lord phillips has said , not always - leading to the procreation of children and the perpetuation of the human race . if and when the bill becomes law , marriage would become a portmanteau word . marriage between same-sex couples would be lawful as well as marriages between a man and a woman . the intention is that same-sex couples who choose to marry should enjoy equality of rights and equality of esteem with men and women who choose to marry . i have no problem whatever with that , although equality of rights is something that can be , and largely has been , achieved by changes in the law without any change of nomenclature while equality of esteem , although it may be assisted by a change in the law , will not be achieved by that alone . my amendment today is concerned solely with the law . the bill changes the meaning of the word " marriage " , which is where humpty dumpty comes in . it makes marriage between same-sex couples as lawful as marriages between a man and a woman . as the noble lord , lord cormack , said , there still remain some ineluctable differences between the two kinds of marriage . the law will need to recognise , and be able to provide for , this distinction . the bill already shows that some of the existing legislative provisions which apply to marriage , as we have known it , cannot apply to marriages between same-sex couples , although we should want them still to apply to marriages between a man and a woman . my amendment proposes that , for the purposes of the law , marriages between a man and a woman should be " matrimonial marriages " . this would mean no change in the meaning of the word " matrimony " , which would continue to mean what it has always meant : the act of two free persons mutually taking one another for husband and wife . i do not need to pray humpty dumpty in aid of my amendment . there are precedents for a qualifying adjective for certain kinds of marriage . for instance , in continental legal systems - although not i think in english law - there used to be morganatic marriages , where a man and a woman were lawfully married but the children of the marriage were disqualified from inheriting the father's hereditary honours . the amendment which i am proposing would provide a convenient means of distinguishing in legislation , where necessary , between marriages of a man and a woman - matrimonial marriages - and marriages of same-sex couples . the word and concept of marriage would apply to both kinds of marriage , but the amendment would provide a serviceable legal distinction for one kind of marriage . it implies no moral , ethical or value-based judgment , or discrimination , between the two kinds of marriage . i commend it to the house . lord lea of crondall : my lords , i would like to know the basis on which any noble lord would disagree with the sentiments expressed by the noble lord , lord armstrong of ilminster .  my lords , i agree entirely with my noble friend lord phillips . we are talking about two types of union which are entirely different : different in the way in which the union is manifested , in the obligations that flow from that union , and in the sanctions that can be obtained if one party defaults . at second reading my noble friend lord jenkin missed the point entirely , which is very rare for him . he did not think that lumping together these two unions was redefining marriage , and said that it was not going to redefine his marriage . with respect to my noble friend , that is not the point . what about those coming up to marriageable age who are contemplating whether to marry ? might not this mishmash of traditional marriage and the union of two people of the same sex , with the accent no longer on family , make some people wonder whether to go ahead ? what will they feel when denied the opportunity to have a traditional marriage ? one of the strangest assertions i have heard during this debate is that marriage will be strengthened if we go ahead with this bill . there is not a jot of evidence to support that proposition ; in fact , all the evidence is to the contrary . some of us may have heard dr patricia morgan when she -  i was just getting to the experience of other countries , and it does seem that some people have been put off . dr patricia morgan produced evidence to show that since gay marriage was introduced in spain in 2005 , the decline in heterosexual marriage has been precipitous . it has been just the same in holland since 2001 , and also in scandinavia . there is not one example of this change going ahead and marriage increasing . the result has been exactly the opposite .  i am afraid that the noble lord is wrong about that . it was certainly true that in spain there was a relaxation in divorce at the time of the introduction of same-sex marriage , but i am talking about new marriages . there was a big decline in new marriages in spain since the change came about . so it seems obvious that if marriage between same-sex couples is to be allowed , at the very least it should be made clear that it is very different from traditional marriage . baroness williams of crosby : my lords , political decisions are often influenced by issues of conscience . speaking for myself , i have never confronted a more difficult decision than the one about equal marriage in the bill that confronts us today . i voted against the amendment of the noble lord , lord dear , because i believe that the house had a duty to look scrupulously at and scrutinise carefully every detail of this complicated bill . i also believe that it was wrong to try to nullify a decision made in the other house as a result of a substantial majority on a free vote . since then , i have had to confront the outcome of that and , with others in this house , consider very carefully the proposals before the committee . in my view , marriage has been for a long time the foundation of family life in this country and elsewhere . in that case , i believe that it is indeed a framework for procreation and the raising of children . as we all know , among mammals , human beings take longer to reach maturity than virtually any other creature on the planet . it takes between 15 and 18 years for a child to mature - if one takes an optimistic view - and i think many of us recognise that nowadays the actual figure may be well over 20 . what that means is that we are looking at a very different proposition from other mammals . we are looking at what has to be a very large part of a life's commitment to raise children properly , which is a very substantial factor that we have not yet considered sufficiently . as my noble friend lord alderdice has pointed out , the evidence from social workers and psychiatrists suggests - i will not put it more strongly than that - that it looks as if a marriage between a man and a woman is probably the best and most stable basis for raising children that we have so far invented . i would also suggest that there is another factor than simply the biological one . of course , we know that there is a biological difference between the genders but it is also critical to say that there is a difference between the approaches of the genders to a whole range of issues . as the famous american writer carol gilligan pointed out in her book , in a different voice , women and men approach relationships , and very often their relationships with the whole of society , rather differently ; above all , they complement one another . that is the basis of what is known in the churches as holy matrimony and something that we have to consider very carefully indeed . traditional marriage also gives equal value to parents of both genders . in a moving statement yesterday , mr lammy , the member of parliament for tottenham , pointed out that there had been a serious devaluation of the role of fathers in our society , citing his own experience as the child of a single-parent family . today hundreds of thousands of children - more than 1 million - are being brought up without fathers or mothers or another permanent , loving or male presence . single-parent families often display truly amazing - indeed , nearly miraculous - commitment to their children . many of them are the breadwinners as well as the main carers for their families . i am often breathless with amazement at the extraordinary courage and dedication that the heads of single-parent families bring to that duty . but often they find it utterly exhausting to try to handle the whole burden on their own . that is not to condemn in any way single-parent families but to say loudly and clearly that the role of fathers should once again be sustained by the state and by society because they are such a crucial element in sustaining a long-lasting and loving family between two parents . however , of course there is a different side to the argument . the most reverend primate the archbishop of canterbury said that he had been stunned by the quality of some of the relationships between gay men and lesbian women that he had come across . i accede to that completely . among my own friends , some of the most remarkable examples of human union that i have ever come across are between my gay and lesbian friends and their partners . therefore , why should there be any difference in the nomenclature ? the distinction is perhaps best made by pointing out the very different roles , as has been done already by several speakers in this debate , of a marriage that is based on the outcome of procreation - the long-term maturing of children - and a relationship that is based on the huge , total and intimate relationship between two people who wish to live their lives together . quite straightforwardly , the churches have a great responsibility in being asked to be forgiven for some of the attitudes taken towards gay people in the past . the christian churches are fundamentally about forgiveness - not about vengeance , but about forgiveness . jesus christ asked not only that human beings be forgiven but that human beings forgive one another for their mutual and reciprocal sins . i say loudly and clearly that the christian churches , believing as they do in forgiveness , should ask forgiveness for the long , abusive and often cruel treatment of gay people over many years . i hope that that is something they will address now that they are under charitable and understanding leadership . in conclusion , i strongly agree with the noble and learned lord , lord mackay of clashfern , and indeed with the noble lord , lord armstrong of ilminster , that we need different descriptions for what are essentially different commitments . equality is about equality of respect and equality of dignity . i strongly support it and i have done all my life . but equality is not the same as sameness . that is the fundamental mistake in this bill . therefore , there is no reason why a different nomenclature describing different levels and different kinds of commitment should not be part of this bill . i strongly urge that we find nomenclature that describes the real differences - equal differences , but differences nonetheless - between couples who are married according to the traditional method and couples who are married because they seek a life-lasting union under this bill . i support the noble lord , lord armstrong of ilminster .  i think that there is a misunderstanding between us about the difference between being equal and being the same . if you have two different things and put them together , you do not arrive at a larger quantity of the thing that was originally there ; you arrive at something new . if you add one part of hydrogen to two parts of oxygen , you finish up with water . whatever you say in the law , there are two different categories here ; what we are trying to do , in all charity , is to bring them together and bring some sort of reconciliation and mutual recognition of understanding , which is being made exceedingly difficult , if not impossible , by the way this thing has been introduced into parliament and into public life . however , the fact remains that when you have one part hydrogen and two parts oxygen , you finish up with water and not hydrogen .  the noble lord is giving us a very fine history of a number of changes which have , by statute , been brought about in relation to the definition of marriage . is he suggesting that any of those changes was of the scale and nature of the change now being proposed ?  i nearly always find myself in almost total agreement with the noble lord , but surely the one constant throughout all these changes is that the relationship has been between a man and a woman .  my lords , amendment 34 is down in my name and that of my noble friend lord edmiston . i should like to convey his apologies for not being here today and although the words will be mine , the spirit will be ours . when i spoke at second reading i think i was fairly clear . no one was confused . i was not in favour of this bill . i had the pleasure of speaking immediately after my noble friend lord dobbs , and i am happy to do so again . i will come back in a few moments to something he said . i was not in favour of it because , as i pointed out , i had grown up in a home and environment where both christian and conservative principles and values had dominated . that was my view and i voted against the bill receiving a second reading . however , i have been in this place long enough to know that when both houses have spoken with such overwhelming majorities , we have got to address that issue . we then have the right to turn to how we can , if possible , make the legislation better . i would like to say to the noble and learned lord , lord brown of eaton-under-heywood , that i think he did some of us a slight injustice . we are not trying to rerun second reading and the concepts behind it by tabling these sorts of amendments . there is a difference between traditional marriage - as it has been referred to - and same-sex marriage , which the government recognise in schedule 4 , part 2 and part 3 of the bill . the word " marriage " is used to cover both . the noble and learned lord , lord brown , may be interested to know that i did not attach my name to the amendment of the noble lord , lord hylton , and my noble friend lord cormack precisely because i thought that , having been as outspoken as i was at second reading , i would be accused of trying to undermine the principle of the bill in some other devious way . that is why i did not attach my name to that amendment although i support it . my amendment and that of my noble friend lord edmiston addresses a separate point . we have spent more than an hour talking about the substance of marriage , and in some cases rehearsing second reading , but in reality - in biological reality if nothing else - there are differences between a marriage of a man and a woman and a marriage of two men or two women . i am staying well clear of the symbolism and the aspirations . i am simply stating a fact . my noble friend lord dobbs said that we must address the political correctness which has concerned and dominated us for too long . i want to agree with him but in a different context . when this house and the other place have passed legislation around religious hate crimes , racial hate crimes and the like , once the well-meaning , carefully written legislation was subjected to general use , those whose sense of political correctness exceeded that of most of us in this chamber got to work . people , employees and workers , particularly in the public sector , were accused of all sorts of things in the name of that legislation and in many cases it took them months and a fortune to prove that what they were accused of was not in accordance with the law of the land . their reputations never totally recovered . i foresee that possibility arising out of this legislation . your lordships will notice that i have not addressed the substance of marriage and i have not tried to define it . i say to my noble friend the minister that i would like the bill to state that for the general public who are not involved in all this deep theological and , if i may say so , legal analysis , it is all right to say -   i commend the noble baroness for her enthusiasm . i will give way in just a moment . i would like the ordinary men and women of this country to be able to say , " it is legally all right ; i am not involved in hatred of any sort if i talk about a traditional marriage between a man and a woman or if i talk about a same-sex marriage between two men or two women " . the bill needs to reassure people that they can state what is factually the case and not have their jobs or reputations put at risk because somebody interprets this legislation in the way that race and religious hatred legislation has been interpreted thus far .  i think not , because " ancient " and " modern " carry with them designations which are likely to complicate an already pretty complicated set of circumstances . i am just a simple belfast boy and " traditional " and " same sex " seem to me to be a fair reflection . however , in the same spirit as that shown by the noble lord , lord hylton , and my noble friend lord cormack , if somebody can find a better way to put in the bill simple phrases that ordinary people can use to protect themselves against being charged with some sort of hatred , i would be very happy to consider that .  my lords , i am grateful to the noble lord for his intervention . he knows , perhaps better than most in the house , that i have a fairly strong commitment to freedom of expression . that commitment to freedom of expression and the government's commitment to freedom of expression have been there for years . however , that has not stopped people being accused of hate crimes , race crimes and religious crimes . i do not believe that simply using the term " freedom of expression " , or repeating it , will be any more effective than it has been over the past 30 years . something simple needs to be put in the bill that everybody can understand and behind which everybody , whatever their view of the issue , can take refuge , if necessary .  my lords , two themes have run through the debate . on one there is almost universal agreement that we must seek to achieve equality . we also have to recognise that there are differences between the two forms of marriage . having said that - and i am sorry that i do not carry the noble lord , lord alli , with me - it seems to me that we need effectively to recognise both the need for equality and the point that i have just made . i led from the front bench on the civil partnership bill , which was a great step forward . none the less , it is perhaps unfortunate that its terminology did not recognise the aspect of equality , and it has certainly not been recognised by the country as a whole . what we need , therefore , is some recognition that there are two forms of marriage . if we do that , marriage will appear on both sides of the equation , representing equality . as suggested in amendment 34 , we need to have traditional marriage on the one hand , and same-sex marriage on the other . if we do that , we can achieve both of the objectives we seek , and reconcile the differences which have otherwise been apparent in the debate . one hopes that both the gay community and the community as a whole will recognise the status of these two forms of marriage as equal . i see no reason why this can not be done .  my lords , the legislation itself refers to two different types of marriage . it is there in how it is written . i am concerned that the attempt to find some common ground between deep divisions is being interpreted as some sort of wrecking amendment . the idea of union is fine ; it says everything . i cannot see any difference . the english language is very rich in giving precision to meaning , but sometimes it is not precise enough . we do not want to make it less precise . for example , the indian languages hindi and punjabi have different words for " uncle " and " aunt " depending on which side of the couple they come from , the mother's or the father's . these words give precision so that you know what you are talking about . here , if you use the words " union " and " marriage " , that is fine ; we know what we are talking about . there is nothing to suggest that one is less equal than the other , which would be totally wrong .  my lords , i have tabled amendment 2 in this group . i was led to put this amendment down in an attempt to analyse what the differences are on this bill . they are quite deep in this house , in the other place and in the country . i thought that something could possibly be done to try to bridge the divide . the claim made by the proposers of the bill is that whatever happens , the word " marriage " should be at the forefront of its title . anything less takes away to some extent from that , although very worthy words have been proposed . when one looks at the debate here and in the other place , and reads the letters we have had - i thank the people who have sent many letters to me ; i cannot possibly answer them all in view of my commitment to this - one can see that there is a feeling among many people in this country that same-sex marriage on the one hand and opposite-sex marriage on the other are different , and in a number of ways . they may have much in common and yet have distinctions . i believe that the attempt to deal with this sort of thing in the descriptions given in the myth busters document that was published along with the bill did not really look at the main objection that people have , which is the fact that , over many centuries , marriage has signified a relationship between the opposite sexes . that is the fundamental point which a lot of people have grasped and held on to , in a way that is difficult for them to accommodate in any other context . when the myth busters got going , they used a technique which i remember being described by the great advocate sir milner holland to the effect that if you cannot answer a point , the best thing to do is to set up a cockshy as close to the point as possible , knock it down with a great flurry and then pass on . that , in effect , is what has happened . the myth buster talks about the myth of having no development in marriage over the years . anyone who has listened to this debate or read the volume to which the noble lord , lord pannick , referred at second reading will know that there have been many developments in marriage over the years . the idea that there have been none is not the foundation of the argument at all ; rather , it is that the fundamental distinction is between a marriage where the relationship is between people of opposite sexes and what is proposed in this bill . what i think might be of use in dealing with that is to recognise within the nomenclature of the bill that there are two distinct provisions , one relating to same-sex marriage and the other to opposite-sex marriage . i did not put down the opposite-sex marriage amendment today because i saw that these other amendments about traditional marriage and so on had been tabled . there is reference to opposite-sex marriage in clause 11 , alongside same-sex marriage . ultimately , it does not make any difference to the provisions . however , it does signify that the distinction between the two is understood by the legislature and that the title " marriage " is given to what the proponents of the bill want , at the same time as recognising that those distinctions exist .  reference has been made by my noble friend to children . one of the greatest matters to be concerned about these days is the way in which the abuse of our children has reached extraordinary lengths over quite long periods , with the authorities seemingly unable to extricate them from it . it is very distressing . it has nothing whatever to do with this bill , but it has to do with the fact that we must think carefully about children . i feel particularly distressed because i had a part in the children act which , in a sense , is the foundation of the system whereby the state takes care of children . as far as i understand it , most of these abused children have been in the care system - i find this particularly difficult to take . the provisions concerning children in this bill need to be looked at . part 2 of schedule 4 says : " section 11 does not extend the common law presumption that a child born to a woman during her marriage is also the child of her husband ... accordingly , where a child is born to a woman during her marriage to another woman , that presumption is of no relevance to the question of who the child's parents are " . that seems to leave the position of the child very much in limbo . the idea that there is no difference at all between the two is not borne out by that kind of provision . we need to think about this as well the other matters that have been spoken about . while i am on the subject , paragraph 3(2) of the same schedule says : " only conduct between the respondent and a person of the opposite sex may constitute adultery for the purposes of this section " . as your lordships may imagine , a child born of a woman who is a partner in a same-sex relationship is in a somewhat difficult position if it has been born by natural processes . the position of children in this area needs carefully to be considered . when my right honourable friend the secretary of state introduced this bill in the house of commons , she recognised the deep divisions over it . the best solution i can suggest for dealing with these divisions is to hope that parliament might show that , in passing the bill , it appreciates the distinction between same-sex and opposite-sex marriage , but that it has decided to produce a bill which gives to same-sex couples the rights that belong to opposite-sex couples , subject to the modifications that the bill makes to accommodate the distinction between the two .  my lords , i apologise for not being here in your lordships' house at second reading . i thank noble lords for their greetings on that occasion , when i was recovering from surgery . i am on the mend , although i am not quite there yet . i want to thank especially the noble baroness , lady royall of blaisdon , for the generous compliments in her speech . i suggest that this legislation is an exercise in ideological redefinition . the amendments before us today are designed to limit this ideological damage . i will speak to the one amendment that probably does it better than the others . the legislation does not address the concrete disadvantages from which same-sex couples still suffer . it is a matter of deep personal regret and sorrow to me that homosexual people are still diminished , which is anathema to me and to the primates of the anglican communion . in the 2005 dromantine communiqué , we said that the diminishing of homosexual people is anathema to the christian faith . however , it still happens , which is a deep regret for me . i want to tell them that i am sorry . the great difference between this legislation and the reform that introduced civil partnerships is that the latter remedied certain concrete difficulties and disadvantages . what injustice would be remedied by some civil partnerships becoming marriages ? that argument of remedying injustices does not seem to carry much weight ; the argument lies somewhere else . ministers of the crown have argued that the legislation extends to an excluded minority a concrete privilege currently enjoyed by the majority . what is that privilege ? the privileges that accompany marriage have already been extended to same-sex couples through civil partnership legislation . however , since marriage has been defined in law and practice as a relationship between a man and woman , marriage , as so defined , cannot in law be extended to same-sex couples . the draft legislation presupposes an account of marriage that makes the gender of the partners incidental to the institution . this , to me , is a novelty . it does not correspond to marriage as it has been known in british law and society . this is not an extension of something that already exists but the creation of a new institution , under the aegis of existing marriage law , which is in fact quite different from it . we are somewhat ill prepared midwives at the birth of a new social institution . why not give it a new name ? the interests served by the legislation before us are , i suggest , ideological and aimed at changing the way people think : hence the amendments before us today are rightly geared towards protecting individual freedoms in the face of a radically new ideology . the church shares , in the best traditions of this house , a passion for justice and a deep concern for the particular needs of minorities . these concerns have been met in the provisions of the civil partnership legislation . however , today , the question turns on two other interests of the church : first , an interest in the truthful description of anything ; and , secondly , an interest in defending responsible practices of government against the sophistic abuse of language . it matters that we recognise this as a new social institution . as a christian , i would argue that being a man or a woman is not incidental to the human relations a person may engage in , but formative of them . in christian understanding , the meaning of human sexual difference is in the good gift of god in creation . the maleness and femaleness of the human race are given to us . it is where we are placed , in common with the whole human race in every generation . our role is to be thankful for it and to understand how it helps us to live the human lives that we are given . this task of appreciating our sexual difference weighs equally on married and unmarried , on gay and straight , and on children and adults - on all who have the gift of being human . christians , in common with jews and muslims , understand marriage as essentially representative of this good gift of sexual difference . this understanding flows from an undivided and unbroken tradition that has sought to define the unity of the human race , uniting nations , religions , cultural traditions and periods of history . in describing marriage as bound up constitutively and generatively with male-female relations , we describe a good form of life for which we can be unreservedly thankful . as with any aspect of creation , our interpretation of marriage is not final . reality is deeper than its interpretation ; there is always more to be learnt . our thinking may be shaped by artists , working in whatever form , who represent to us some fragment of reality to be recognised . it will be shaped also by scientists , who model complex interactions and observations in formulae that render them intelligible . it may also be shaped by theologians , teaching us to thematise that which artists and scientists have shown within the larger picture of the goodness of god . the unamended legislation uses the term " marriage " to describe a new entity . for me this entity is worthy in itself , but it is not equivalent to marriage as hitherto described . i have argued that this is not an area for state intervention . the work of government does not lie in teaching us how to interpret and think about reality . yet we are here . the trouble with this undifferentiated use of the term " marriage " is that it will create confusion on the one hand , and erode freedom of conscience on the other . the amendment of the noble and learned lord , lord mackay , seeks to remedy this . it calls both same-sex marriage and opposite-sex marriage " marriage " . in contrast , the legislation to create civil partnerships was , for me , a proper exercise in formal terms of the authority of government . that legislation was precise in its use of language . it recognised the intrinsic difference between the loving , life-long commitment of same-sex couples and the loving , life-long commitment of male and female couples in marriage . i respectfully submit that those who sought to extend the scope of civil partnerships beyond same-sex couples would have made the legislation lack legal clarity . its intention would have been blurred , if not thwarted . those who resisted the extension of civil partnerships beyond same-sex couples were right , because it would have blurred the entire conversation and the entire discussion . without some clearer classification , as suggested in the amendment of the noble and learned lord , lord mackay , we introduce a degree of ambiguity that is not common in law . this cannot help anyone , because clause 11 still refers to " opposite sex " . we must be very careful about how we arrive at an answer . responsible government is government under law . a responsible government must prevent , as far as they can , the judgment that the law is an ass . i believe that fracturing the law of marriage into two alternative concepts of marriage inevitably inflicts damage of very serious proportions on english law , weakening the authority of the law as a whole . this damage can be lessened by the very honest amendment of the noble and learned lord , lord mackay . this amendment seeks clarity and makes an important distinction . if it is accepted , as i sincerely hope it will be , it will go some way towards preserving the integrity of the law . i support the amendment , and i hope the house will have the same view .  my lords , i will be extremely brief . i am not sure whether i prefer the amendment set down by the noble lords , lord hylton and lord cormack , or the one set down by the noble and learned lord , lord mackay , but i believe that either of them would help bridge the divide . therefore , i am generally in favour of both of them and would be happy with either . the only point i want to make is to refer back to something that the noble lord , lord carlile , said about children . i think that he rather oversimplified the matter . if a same-sex couple says to its children , " yes , we are married " , and those children have had what i would call the benefit of religious education and say , " but we have been told that marriage is between a man and a woman " , this seems divisive and it would be very difficult to square the circle with them on that .  my lords , i , too , am a trustee of the marriage foundation , which i should say is totally neutral on this subject . in any case , i am speaking personally . to pick up a point made by the noble baroness , lady williams , about children , when i was a family judge i tried cases where i placed children with gay couples , male or female . i had the utmost confidence that those children would be extremely well brought up . nothing that we are discussing today , or indeed in this bill , leads me to believe that whatever a same-sex couple's relationship is called would have anything to do with the excellent way in which very many children are brought up by lesbian and homosexual couples . that is my own personal experience , sitting as a judge . i did not speak at second reading ; i thought that 90 speakers were enough . like others , i have received more than 100 letters which my secretary has so far replied to , and many more e-mails . it might interest the house to know that 98% were opposed to this bill , but the 2% in favour were also extremely persuasive . listening to the earlier speakers , it seems clear to me that the word " union " will not be treated by those seeking marriage as the equivalent of " marriage " , for the reasons that have already been given . since it is clear that this bill is going through , it is time for us to try to find the best way forward . those who support the bill are - to use the colloquialism - hooked on the word " marriage " . that we have to accept , but the government need to recognise the strength of feeling of those who are opposed to the use of the word " marriage " simpliciter as recognising the marriage of couples of the same sex . we must find a middle way . i strongly support the amendment in the name of the noble and learned lord , lord mackay of clashfern , because this house urgently needs to seek reconciliation and find a compromise , as the noble lord , lord phillips of sudbury , said earlier . somehow we have to allow the word " marriage " and somehow we have to distinguish between different sorts of marriage . as the noble and learned lord , lord mackay of clashfern , has pointed out - and i aim to say in later amendments to this bill - this is a question of equality but it is not a question of uniformity . you cannot have uniformity in this bill together with what you get in the marriage of opposite-sex couples . one only has to look at part 4 of the bill , as the noble and learned lord , lord mackay of clashfern , has done , to see that there are differences . there is nothing wrong with differences in equality . as the most reverend primate the archbishop of canterbury said at second reading , there is a danger of equating equality and uniformity in this bill . i cannot see how amendment 2 can be objectionable to people . the " marriage " word is used and those who are in any marriage are equal , but the amendment recognises that there are differences . you cannot say that marriage for same-sex couples has in any way a lower status than marriage for heterosexual couples has . for goodness' sake , at the end of the day we are legislators , if i might respectfully remind the house , legislating for what people on the ground will actually be doing . as the noble baroness , lady shackleton , pointed out , there are all sorts of marriages : those who wish to marry ; those who are already married - i have to confess that i have been married for very nearly 55 years , and to the same man ; and marriages for the second or third time . we have to recognise this , but we also have to recognise that there is a difference , and although the noble baroness , lady noakes , talked about different sorts of marriage , the different sorts of marriage that she mentioned were actually between male and female , because in those days they could be nothing else ; they were all male-female . this amendment would be a compromise in an otherwise deeply divisive bill . i have to say to those who have been talking about the children , particularly the noble lord , lord carlile , that perhaps most important of all -   you have to recognise the truth of it . the most reverend primate pointed out the importance of truth . it is different . we have to look at some stage , as the noble and learned lord , lord mackay , pointed out , at how we deal with the children of a couple who cannot have their own children as a couple .  the declaration of sexuality would be relevant only at the moment of marriage . it would not be relevant to everybody else who meets them or knows it . they will be married . perhaps the most important point made by the noble lord , lord carlile , was about children . if we have marriage and same-sex marriage , so far as the children are concerned , it is marriage . they will say , " my parents are married " . it seems to me that the noble and learned lord , lord mackay of clashfern -   i am grateful to the noble lord for being prepared to answer the question that i asked him some considerable time ago . the house needs to recognise the deep division that exists both in this house and in the country . from the quantity of e-mails and letters that i have received , i know that there are a number of people out there who are bitterly upset , bitterly distressed and angry at what has happened with this bill . i support the noble and learned lord , lord mackay of clashfern , because the amendment is a compromise - it is an attempt at reconciliation . i do not support the word " union " for the very sensible reasons that have been given . i think that there has to be the word " marriage " - i am , with regret , converted to that now - but i believe that we have to seek a middle way . if we do not , there will be many people out there listening who will be even more upset than people in this house .  i should like to answer the question that was not put while i was speaking . the provisions in the bill for same-sex and opposite-sex couples are different , and therefore it is only right that a distinction should be recognised in the bill for that purpose . that would not make one any less lawful than the other or anything of that sort , but it would distinguish between the provisions that apply to same-sex couples and those that apply to opposite-sex couples . nobody can deny that these provisions are different in the bill . so far as the noble baroness , lady thornton , is concerned , there is no necessity to declare one's sexuality in relation to same-sex marriage . as i pointed out at second reading - and i am sure that the noble baroness listened carefully - there is no question of needing to be gay to engage in a same-sex marriage . platonic relationships between people of the same sex would perfectly suit the bill as it stands .  my lords , amendment 9 in this group is in my name and i should like to speak to it now . i have a great deal of sympathy with what the noble and learned baroness , lady butler-sloss , said . she really focused , as did the most reverend primate the archbishop of york , on the blurring of the wording before us in the bill . there has been some comment about the difference between equality and sameness , and we touched on that at second reading . what we have heard today has , very largely , been two alternative points of view . one is that out of civil partnership might have arisen something which itself would grow into the dignification of something similar to marriage , and the other is a fusion - which is what the bill is really talking about - of two completely different strands into the one nomenclature of marriage . it is that point that i wanted to mention in introducing amendment 9 and to offer a way forward - a compromise to where we are now . the government say that the bill is about ensuring equality , fairness and respect for same-sex couples who wish to have their relationship recognised in marriage , and i agree with that . i hope the government will also accept that there also needs to be equality , fairness and respect for those who hold a different opinion . much has been said about protecting churches and individual clergy from being forced to officiate at same-sex marriages . i believe i am right in saying that there is nearly universal agreement in your lordships' house on the important principle of protecting religious liberty in that regard . indeed , the bill includes provisions that the matrimonial laws of the church of england will be largely unaffected . in other words , the church law of marriage will remain in place . this is especially important because the church of england has a unique privilege as the established church and a special common-law duty to provide services of marriage to people in parishes throughout the land . i know that the church is grateful for the steps taken by the government in that regard . time will tell whether those protections will stand the evitable challenges of the uk and european courts . some of us are not altogether optimistic in that regard . be that as it may , the government's intention is that the canon law of the church of england remains intact . the principle underlying this protection is one of freedom and liberty . that is a good and right principle that has widespread support in your lordships' house and in the country at large . that being the case , should we not also apply it to the non-established churches , to places of worship of a non-christian faith and to couples who wish to enter into a marriage as traditionally defined ? under the bill , a couple wishing to marry according to the current legal definition of marriage can technically do so only in a church of england church . if betrothed couples wish to marry in a nonconformist church , a non-christian place of worship or in a civil setting , they will be forced to use the new - let us call it gender-neutral - definition of marriage . for people of faith , deep questions of conscience arise , especially as that new definition of marriage will be the one used in the service of worship . this is causing deep hurt and offence . we have already heard at least two references in your lordships' house today to the volume of letters and e-mails . i am something of a lightning conductor in this issue because of the amendment i moved at second reading , and my count is more than 1 ,000 letters and e-mails . my percentage count is exactly same as that of the noble and learned baroness , lady butler-sloss , with 98% against the bill and 2% for it . i place no great emphasis on that other than to say that there is very deep concern out there and outside the westminster village . for many people , many churches and those of other faiths , the bill fundamentally alters the meaning of marriage . i accept that churches are unlikely for the time being to be forced to marry people of the same sex . however , outside the church of england they will be forced to marry people according to the new definition , which is what i want to focus on now . that will be the only option available to them . churches , the non-christian faiths and the couples themselves are being forced to publicly declare that their relationship equates to a new , gender-neutral definition . for many people - perhaps that 98% i mentioned - that is absolutely not what they want . it contradicts their most deeply held religious or philosophical beliefs . they want to enter into a marriage that accords to their own understanding of marriage and their most deeply held beliefs . that perhaps is not an unreasonable expectation . all marriage ceremonies , however held , must include a declaration by each of the parties that there is no lawful impediment to marriage and that each consents to marry the other . every couple who marry currently do so in the knowledge that they are entering an institution that is a voluntary union for life of one man and one woman to the exclusion of all others . it may be said that some people are free to attach their own meanings to their own marriages and can use whatever additional words or promises they want , but that is missing the point . the key element of marriage is that the couple are making a public declaration that they are married . that requires a public declaration of what marriage is , and we have heard a great deal about that this afternoon in your lordships' house . under the bill , the definition changes so that marriage will be a gender-neutral institution . that is not what many couples want or believe about marriage . they should have the option of publicly declaring that their marriage is in accordance with the current law , which is consistent with their faith or beliefs . my amendment addresses this problem in a very simple , reasonable and non-destructive way . for marriages outside the church of england , it introduces an optional form of words for the solemnisation of a marriage , which reflects the current legal definition of marriage - that is , the definition that is currently understood . i emphasise that this will apply only to couples who want to take that option . this is about giving people a choice and respecting their different beliefs . it is a permissive measure . it does not affect the legalisation of same-sex marriage in any way ; it does not take away clause 1 of the bill . it simply respects those who disagree by giving them the option to register a definition of marriage that reflects their beliefs - which are universally respected throughout the world , and , if i may say so , throughout history . with this amendment , non-established churches and those of other faiths at least have the option to offer couples a declaration of marriage that is acceptable to their beliefs and publicly recognised . it will be a significant help to those faith groups . put simply , without this amendment couples who have a traditional view of marriage have three options . they can get married in the church of england , not get married at all or get married in a ceremony where the declaration of marriage does not reflect their beliefs . i will conclude by quoting again from the paper that i mentioned both in my opening remarks at second reading and when i wound up , when i talked about some research that had been carried out in argentina . noble lords may remember that i indicated that argentina was , to my knowledge , the last country to follow pretty well exactly the same steps that we took in legislating , and that two years on it is now in a position to measure the results . the results are huge in terms of unintended consequences . i will read from the very last paragraph of a paper by dr ursula basset , which touches on much of what we have heard about the public view and getting uniformity of view and acceptability to this legislation . dr basset says : " argentina is moving toward uniformity . previously , we had two brothers : homonormativity and heteronormativity . they both desired the " marriage word " . homonormativity won , and redefined marriage to adapt it to its needs . the new definition and its consequences were imposed on the whole of society . heteronormativity and its peculiarities were abolished as a rule , and heteronormativity lived as an expatriate in its own land without any visible juridical recognition in society " . the prose is a bit purple , but we can understand what it is saying . as two competing viewpoints jostle for a place in this nest that we are calling marriage , i contend that it is very important that there is a willing acceptance by the majority outside of what we are legislating about . i confidently commend amendment 9 to noble lords as one way forward to get that acceptance .  let me make it absolutely clear that it had nothing to do with that . it is important - to me anyway - that children are considered . that is what i wanted to be considered . i do not link it to same-sex marriage at all . i never did and i do not think that anything i said could reasonably be so construed .  perhaps i may interrupt . i withdrew my name from that amendment , even though i fully support my noble friend lord dear in what he has said . i was a teller when we had the debate and it was clear to me that , almost by three to one , we as a house declared our unanimity with the house of commons . therefore this debate is not about going over old ground again , but about finding a way forward to meet the deep discord and anger in the country . many people are very worried about this bill . how can we go forward together and find some unanimity of language ? that is why the noble and learned lord , lord mackay , is suggesting that amendment .  i apologise for interrupting and i am grateful to the noble lord for giving way . i appeal to him to accept that many people in this country are deeply troubled . many wish to see a true equality and true equality is based on difference . can the noble lord not concede that it would be a good idea to find a formula that both would give him what he wants and would ease the minds and consciences of countless people outside this chamber ?  first , i hope that the noble lord will clear up the point about whether i am being mischievous . i hope that he will say in the chamber that i am not . secondly , subsection (2) of the new clause proposed by amendment 9 states simply : " a ' traditional marriage' is one where the basis of the marriage is the voluntary union of one man and one woman for life , to the exclusion of all others " .  perhaps i may make a point to the noble lord . the homosexual community has long been a minority in our society and has protested , understandably loudly , at being unfairly treated . he has just pointed out that those opposed to the bill are now a minority . could he not extend the same generosity that he expects , and try to reach an accommodation in that direction ?  is that quite right ? the amendment of the noble lord , lord dear , states : " nothing in this act takes away the right of a man and woman to enter a traditional marriage " . nothing in the bill takes away that right . it is not a question of one right trumping another . the rights of the traditionalists are protected completely under the bill , and the rights of gay people are also protected .  i think that the noble baroness suggested that my amendment was designed to undermine the bill , although i explicitly made clear that it was not . what would she think about giving ordinary members of the public the assurance that they can use certain phrases , by putting them in the bill , to protect themselves against undue political correctness ? my amendment has nothing to do with the substance that she has addressed so far in her speech .  does the noble baroness agree that what i propose is , in very simple terms , a purely permissive provision that would retain the new legal definition of marriage as introduced by the bill ? it goes very much with the government's line on this and does not seek to change it at all . it would simply set up within that new definition the possibility of the couple getting married declaring their marriage in a form which is acceptable to them and having that registered in a register - a side register , if you like - that the registrar can keep . as i say , the provision would work permissively within the bill and not upset it at all , but would satisfy the 98% , shall we say , who want the comfort of staying with what they understand to be traditional marriage .  my lords , i am grateful to my noble friend . i understand that she just wants marriage without any bells or whistles - just marriage . will those people who are not politicians or lawyers , and who may use the phrase " same-sex marriage " or " traditional marriage " , now be exposed to the charge of committing a hate crime ?  my lords , i am very interested in what my noble friend said about people being able to say what they want without fearing retribution , as it were . i should like to bring to the noble baroness's attention the case of adrian smith , the housing officer who was demoted by a housing authority for expressing the view , in his own time and on his personal facebook page , that same-sex marriage was an equality too far ; and to that of brian ross , the police chaplain who was forced out of his job for stating his opposition to the same-sex marriage proposals . i could go on . can my noble friend tell me where there are safeguards in the bill to prevent that happening ?  my lords , first of all , i thank noble lords for wishing me well in my recovery and on being back in the house . to answer the noble and learned lord , lord mackay , on the question of whether even in the bill itself some distinction is drawn between same-sex marriage and opposite-sex marriage , i would say that a distinction clearly is made in schedule 4 , part 3 , on the divorce and annulment of marriage . it states under the heading " divorce " : " only conduct between the respondent and a person of the opposite sex may constitute adultery for the purposes of this section " , but when it comes to annulment , that does not happen , so already there is an acknowledgment of some kind of distinction between the two types of marriage . i do not think it is right to say that there is no distinction . furthermore , although clause 11 says that marriage is being extended , the particular definition of marriage and the way in which the church of england has perceived it and teaches it are also very different , so i am not so sure that you can deny that even in the bill there are some distinctions .  what about adultery ?  on that point , in the case of a heterosexual marriage , annulment depends on consummation , not procreation . in those circumstances , since that will not apply to same-sex couples , there is no equality in this bill .  my lords , i am honoured and pleased that my amendment should have paved the way for such a profound , important and long-lasting debate . i think that very many of us have been doing our best to find a common ground for honourable , long-term relations between couples of whatever kind . i hope that the government accept that point . for my part , i have come to the view that other amendments in this group , and indeed in the fourth group on the marshalled list , point the way better than mine to the ways in which we can continue to seek improvements to the bill both in committee and in the later stages . i therefore beg leave to withdraw amendment 1 .