my lords , it is a huge privilege to be leading on this important bill , which will make marriage of same-sex couples lawful in england and wales . i will go into detail shortly , but i want to be clear from the outset that this bill is not just about allowing same-sex couples to marry ; it is also about protecting and promoting religious freedom . it is not often that we get to debate and decide legislation that affects people 's lives so directly . this bill addresses things that matter to all of us : our personal freedoms , our faith in what we believe , and the acceptance of who we are and who we love . perhaps i should declare from the outset that i am not married , and as long as george clooney is still available i am prepared to wait . but even though i am single - and i of all people understand that not everyone wants to get married - i believe in the institution of marriage . like many other people , whether married or not , i believe marriage to be one of the fundamental building blocks of a strong society because of the stability , continuity and security that it promotes . i admire couples who make the big decision to marry . marriage remains , as it has for centuries , the way in which most people choose to declare their commitment publicly and permanently to the person they love . when we hear two people exchange their marriage vows , whether in a place of worship or at a registry office , we know that we are witnessing a couple commit to the kind of values that we associate with the special enterprise of shared endeavour - loyalty , trust , honesty and forgiveness . we know that through marriage existing families are extended , as is their commitment and support to new family members . we think that is a good thing , and any of us can choose to do this - unless , of course , we happen to love someone of the same sex . this government think that is wrong , and we want to put it right . so much do we believe in marriage and its importance to our society , we want all couples , whether gay or straight , who are prepared to affirm publicly their commitment to each other and all the responsibility and joy that comes with it , to be free to marry . some people argue that civil partnerships have provided same-sex couples with equality already , and allowing them to marry is not needed . they are right that civil partnerships provided equivalent legal rights . indeed , the progress made by the last labour government in advancing gay rights was massive , and i salute them for all that they achieved . i am grateful to the labour front bench for supporting this bill . but in 2004 , parliament did not provide same-sex couples with the equal opportunity to marriage itself ; back then , we could not conceive that society would allow it . so instead a separate legal regime was established just for same sex-couples . marriage , the exchange of vows , and all that that means , remained available only to men and women prepared to make that commitment to each other . less than 10 years on , independent polling , all of which is included in the house of commons library research paper on the bill , shows that the majority of people in this country are now ready to open up marriage to everyone . indeed , support is growing all the time , and we are not alone ; change is happening around the world . as to my own party 's position , in 2006 , at the first conservative party conference after he became leader , david cameron voiced his support for marriage and equated the commitment of same-sex couples with that of opposite-sex couples . in 2010 , the conservative party made it clear that it would consider the case for equal marriage in its document a contract for equalities , which was published alongside the election manifesto . in 2011 , david cameron said , to wide applause at the conservative party conference , that he supported same-sex marriage because he is a conservative . this coalition government think that now is the right time to make this change . the government have decided to take this step to allow same-sex couples to marry because we believe that doing so really matters . gay and lesbian couples being allowed to marry - to join the institution that they , too , recognise as important - matters because it marks the final acceptance of who they are . allowing same-sex couples to marry and not separating them out from the rest of society matters to families . for parents especially , it means peace of mind . a gay son or daughter will be able to aspire to the same things as their straight brother or sister and be recognised and respected equally . allowing same-sex couples to marry also matters to all of us who believe in the institution of marriage . marriage , this vital element of our social fabric , stands a much safer chance of remaining important to future generations if we make sure that it reflects modern society . we believe that marriage will become nothing but stronger if we open the doors to couples who are currently excluded only because they happen to love someone of the same sex . the bill provides a new freedom for same-sex couples to marry , but theirs is not the only freedom that concerns us . the bill also protects and promotes religious freedom . that is why , as well as allowing same-sex couples to marry in civil ceremonies - in register offices and approved premises such as hotels - the bill takes an entirely permissive approach to religious marriage ceremonies . it will be for religious organisations to decide for themselves whether they wish to marry same-sex couples according to their rites . some have already said that they will ; these include the liberal jews , the quakers and the unitarians . in this way , the religious freedom of these organisations and perhaps others in the future is promoted by this bill . equally , no religious organisation or individual can be forced to conduct or participate in a religious marriage ceremony of a same-sex couple . the religious freedom of those organisations and individuals is protected . the government 's public consultation in 2012 , which prompted nearly 230 ,000 responses and became the largest of its kind ever , was important in informing our approach . since we published our proposals in december last year , we have discussed this permissive approach with a wide range of religious organisations , and i am pleased to report that they are generally content with the protection provided in the bill . the bill has been carefully crafted to contain each element of the quadruple lock which the government committed to last december and which i outlined to this house when i repeated the statement by my right honourable friend the secretary of state at the time . because it is so important , i will explain the quadruple lock again . first , it ensures that the bill states explicitly that no religious organisation or individual minister can be compelled to marry same-sex couples  or to permit such a marriage to take place on their premises ; it provides an opt-in system for religious organisations which wish to conduct marriages for same-sex couples ; it amends the equality act 2010 so that it is not unlawful discrimination for a religious organisation or individual minister to refuse to marry a same-sex couple ; it ensures that the duty on the clergy of the church of england and the church in wales to marry parishioners will not extend to same-sex couples , and that anglican canon law , which says that marriage is a union for life of one man with one woman , is unaffected . i turn now to other rights that we all have and will continue to have because they are not affected by the bill , most specifically the right to freedom of expression . some people are concerned that the bill will impact on freedom of speech , that people such as teachers - or , indeed , anyone while at work - will not be able to criticise same-sex marriage . i can reassure the house that this bill does not in any way affect the perfectly legitimate expression of the perfectly legitimate belief that marriage should only be between a man and a woman . teachers will be expected to teach the factual and legal position when teaching about marriage , as with any area of the curriculum , but they will not be expected to promote or endorse views that go against their own beliefs . it will be unlawful to dismiss a teacher purely for doing so . that said , and as noble lords would expect , the expression of personal beliefs should be done in a professional way and not in a way that would be inappropriate or insensitive to pupils , some of whom may be gay , transgender or the children of a same-sex couple . we are clear that the existing protections for teachers are sound . however , we are , of course , aware that these concerns exist . as the minister for sport and tourism explained in the other place , we are continuing to discuss those concerns further with religious groups to ensure that we have done all we can to put the position beyond doubt . the same is true for employees generally and what they say about same-sex marriage , whether at work or not . freedom to express beliefs about marriage is not affected by this bill . discriminating against someone because they believe , or express the view , that marriage should be between a man and a woman only is unlawful under the equality act 2010 . article 9 of the european convention on human rights also guarantees the right to freedom of thought , conscience and religion . at the same time , i must make it equally clear that it is not acceptable for an employee to act in an offensive or discriminatory way because of someone 's sexual orientation . it is wholly wrong to persecute someone for being gay , lesbian , bisexual or transgender . it is not wrong for someone to say that they do not believe in same-sex marriage . some people have also expressed concerns that the religious protections in the bill could be successfully challenged , whether before domestic courts or the european court of human rights . we are confident that the protections are robust and effective , but rather than my talking about this in detail now , other noble lords far more expert than i in these legal matters will no doubt wish to offer their views during the debate .  i turn to other aspects of the bill and to some of the changes already made during its passage in response to our engagement with religious organisations and others . part 1 allows same-sex couples to marry and provides the religious freedoms and protections i have already mentioned . part 2 enables an individual to change their legal gender without having to end their marriage . part 2 also contains an important new clause - clause 14 - added during commons report stage by a government amendment . this requires the secretary of state to arrange for a review of the options and future of civil partnerships in england and wales . with the government 's agreement , this clause was amended to require that the review will begin as soon as practicable and will include a full public consultation . i am pleased to tell the house that the government are already preparing for this review and will publish its terms of reference before committee . other changes made by the government in response to issues raised include fine-tuning the religious protections in specific areas , such as to protect the position of chaplains employed by secular organisations and the church of england 's ecclesiastical law . we have clarified the arrangements concerning scotland and northern ireland and made changes to improve fairness - for example , in relation to pension rights where a married partner has changed legal gender . even though the government have already made changes to the bill , we continue to listen to concerns and are , of course , willing to consider further changes if necessary to make the protections clearer . indeed , i should say that i , along with my noble and learned friend lord wallace of tankerness , my noble friend lady northover and the bill team officials , with all of whom i have the pleasure of working , will be glad to listen to the concerns of peers and others with an interest in the bill . i speak in support of same-sex couples who want the opportunity to marry because , very simply , this government consider their love and commitment to be no different from that of opposite-sex couples . we believe that same-sex couples should be able to marry if they want to , and that extending that choice is the right thing to do for them and for the future of marriage . if we want future generations to support marriage , we need the institution to reflect our modern inclusive society . i know that many noble lords will also speak in support of the bill today and i am grateful to them , but i also respect those who disagree with me . i understand that many who do not support same-sex marriage do so on the grounds of religious principle . to them , i would point to the religious freedoms which the bill protects and promotes and say this : no religion or faith will be required to change its doctrines or practices because of the bill if it chooses not to . i also understand that some noble lords are unsure whether to support this measure for a range of reasons personal to them . we all have the right to move at different paces when faced with change , but to those who feel unsure let me say this : same-sex marriage is new and different from what we have known up to now and i am not trying to say it is not . however , this change - allowing same-sex couples to marry - will not affect the nature or quality of existing marriages  or new marriages between men and women . the bill simply extends the opportunity for that same quality to be shared by all couples who honour the institution and desire it for themselves . the bill is a force for good and i commend it to the house . i beg to move .    my lords , we live in a civilised and tolerant society , not in alice 's wonderland . i am proud to open this second reading debate on behalf of the opposition benches . i know that a small minority of my noble friends are against this bill , and , naturally , i respect their views , but the majority on my benches , alongside the shadow cabinet , labour 's national policy forum and the labour party conference , warmly support both the bill and the debate , which will enable us to recognise and affirm the loving and lasting commitment of couples who love each other . they must include the noble and learned lord , lord brown of eaton-under-heywood , who with his wife is today celebrating their golden wedding anniversary . i am sure that the whole house will join me in sending them our heartiest congratulations . i pay tribute to my right honourable and honourable friends and to those of all parties in the other place who have enabled the bill 's safe passage . many of  them have shown considerable political courage . this is a hugely important milestone for equality , respect and dignity in our society , which rightly values stable relationships within the framework of marriage . i also thank the noble baroness , lady stowell of beeston , for an excellent introduction to the bill - i hope that george clooney was listening , of course - and for making herself available at all times to discuss concerns and answer questions . from experience , i know that it is particularly challenging for a whip to take responsibility for a controversial piece of legislation , and i know that she will do a terrific job . in an ever-changing world where turmoil and instability are too often the norm , it is a cause for celebration when two people of either the same or the opposite sex wish to commit their lives to each other through marriage . i am the product of a happy marriage and i had the good fortune to enjoy nearly 30 years of marriage . our aim , like that of so many other couples , was to grow old together and to support each other in sickness and in health . we had our ups and downs , but the fact that we were married increased our resolve to make our relationship work , and it was the framework within which we wanted to raise our children . of course , i have friends who are single and who are great parents , and friends who have lived together for many years and who are wonderful parents , such as my noble friend the chief whip - although i am delighted to say that on saturday , he and his partner jill are going to be married . i celebrate that and i would like to be able to celebrate the marriage of gay friends , with or without children . last week , i thought a lot about marriage : not just because of the bill , but because i was choosing a wedding dress with my daughter , charlie . we talked about marriage , which she described as an important ritual that would enable her to make a commitment to the man she loves in front of family , friends and our community . if charlie wanted to marry katherine instead of kane , would i feel any different ? no , i would not , and i would want other parents to have the same joy as i in celebrating the marriage of their children , whether they love people of the same or the opposite sex . some people ask why the bill is necessary when we already have civil partnerships - often , i have to say , the same people who opposed those partnerships when we introduced them in 2004 . civil partnerships were a fantastic step forward and continue to be a great source of joy and security , but some people wish to choose marriage . it has a special status in our society , both historically and symbolically , and it represents a very particular value that the state has placed on the relationship . i well understand that this bill has caused anguish for some people of faith who have concerns either because of the impact of the bill on their faith or on the grounds of faith . i respect all genuine concerns - although clearly not those that are rooted in homophobia - and i am sure that our consideration of this bill will be conducted with our usual tolerance , respecting our differences . i have to say , however , that i simply do not understand those who say that equal marriage can harm or undermine marriage between a man and a woman . surely if we value and cherish marriage , we should want all those who wish to marry  to be able to do so , and we should welcome the fact that marriage would be strengthened by opening it up to more couples . surely we should be encouraging our young people , who see the love and strength their parents draw from their marriage , to aspire to the same commitment regardless of whether it is with another man or another woman . there has been much discussion about whether there are sufficient protections for religious organisations . just like equality , freedom of religion is central to a human rights-based society . that is why it is vital that the bill does not impose an obligation on any faith group to conduct same-sex marriages . the minister has spoken in detail about the quadruple lock and we are satisfied that the protections the government have put in place in the bill are sufficient to ensure that no faith group will be at risk of a human rights challenge for refusing to solemnise same-sex marriage . naturally , this house will carefully scrutinise the protections contained in the bill for religious freedom . i welcome that , and i look forward to the contributions of the noble lord , lord pannick , and my noble friend baroness kennedy , who were crystal clear in their evidence to the public bill committee . i look forward also to the contribution of the most reverend primate to this debate . i know that the church of england has rightly been working closely with the government and i am pleased that there is agreement that the safeguarding of the position of canon law has been achieved and that the quadruple locks offer the necessary protection . i know that the bishops now warmly support civil partnerships and i have read of the bishop of salisbury 's endorsement of same-sex marriage . both are matters to be celebrated . i have also had excellent discussions with some right reverend prelates in which we agreed that , from their perspective , the bill would not result in the sky falling in or family life falling apart , while from my perspective it would not be a panacea for relationships , be they gay or straight . i also take this opportunity to send our best wishes to the most reverend primate the archbishop of york for a speedy recovery . naturally , i am glad that the government have listened to the concerns of the church of wales that were raised by my colleagues in another place , which resulted in an amendment to ensure that the lord chancellor will have no power of veto over the church 's decision , should it wish in future to provide for same sex marriages . the position of the quakers and unitarians , and of reform judaism , is absolutely clear , and i am delighted that the bill will enable them to opt in to performing same sex marriage according to their religious rites . last week , while thinking about the second reading , i watched " the times of harvey milk " . i wept at what one might call a chilling reminder of the pain and suffering that gays and lesbians endured a few short years ago - their lives blighted by society 's attitude towards their sexuality . that was 1970s america , but in the 1960s in this country people were locked up or punished for loving someone of the same sex . the conservative government introduced section 28 in 1988 and it was not repealed until the labour government came to power . we had a proud record in making progress against discrimination and in favour of equality ,  and i am grateful for the generous comments of the noble baroness . as well as civil partnerships , we equalised the age of consent , ended the ban on lgbt people serving in our armed forces , made homophobia a hate crime , outlawed discrimination in the workplace and in goods and services , and did much more . the measures were controversial at the time but now have widespread support . we have come a long way , but there still needs to be a cultural shift . the bill is not only hugely important for same sex couples who wish to marry , and for transgender people who are in a marriage ; it can play a critical role in driving attitudinal change . as noble lords are aware , 20 ,000 homophobic crimes are still committed in this country every year , and many children suffer homophobic bullying . they are not just children who may be growing up to be gay , but those with lesbian or gay parents . ninety-five per cent of secondary-school teachers have reported hearing anti-gay language in their schools . the marriage (same sex couples) bill will be a useful tool in tackling these attitudes . it will not just ensure legal equality in the eyes of the state but encourage society to celebrate the identity , relationships , commitment and love that lesbian and gay people share . there are some outstanding issues in relation to the bill that were raised in the other place and have not been resolved . first , pension rights are the subject of considerable debate . currently , the bill provides for less generous pension rights for same sex married couples than for those of opposite sexes in respect of survivor benefits . in the commons we called on the government to come forward with an immediate review into the implications of equalising pension rights , and we will urge them to do this in the course of the bill . secondly , our front bench supported amendments to allow couples to have humanist marriages in england and wales , as almost 3 ,000 already choose to do in scotland . on report in the other place , the attorney-general raised new concerns about the amendments ' compatibility with the human rights act . however , we hope to resolve these issues in committee in this house . thirdly , on transgender issues , the bill will enable individuals to change their legal gender without having to end their marriage , righting a big injustice in our society . we welcome these amendments brought forward by the government on report in another place to protect pension rights for spouses who change their legal gender , as a result of issues raised by my colleagues and others during the public bill committee . however , we will look carefully at further amendments that may be brought forward in relation to transgender marital issues . with regard to heterosexual civil partnerships , a matter of much debate in the commons , we are pleased that the government have now committed to an immediate review of the introduction of such partnerships . i welcome the fact that the terms of reference for this review will be available before committee . there were long debates on the issues of teachers and registrars . our views on this are clear , but it is right that these issues of great importance should be debated fully in your lordships ' house .  i am grateful to the government for giving extra time for this second reading debate and ensuring that the vote will take place at a proper time . some in this house will vote in favour of the amendment tabled by the noble lord , lord dear , and against the bill . i respectfully remind him that proposals to fragment our national health service did not appear in any of the party manifestos , nor in the coalition agreement . perhaps more importantly , i refute the noble lord 's suggestions about support for the bill . the latest yougov polling shows that 71% of people support same-sex marriage , including three out of five people of faith . the noble lord also alleged that the bill would affect divorce rates . it is true that divorce rates in spain increased , but that was because it liberalised its divorce laws at exactly the same time as introducing same-sex marriage . in respect of the composition of the public bill committee and the allegations that its membership was stacked , the only reason that the committee was thus constituted is that the same mps had previously insisted on a free vote across the commons . this meant that the committee 's membership represented the very heavy commons vote in favour of the bill at second reading . in terms of e-mails and postbags , i am sure that those who are against the bill wrote to the noble lord , lord dear , while those who are in favour of the bill wrote to me . to that extent we should question the comments made by the noble lord . however , all in all , i trust that following the detailed and careful scrutiny that this house will give , noble lords will be convinced both by the safeguards in terms of religious faith and the arguments in terms of removing discrimination and extending the dignity and joy of marriage to same-sex couples . i firmly believe that our society will be strengthened when more couples are able to choose to make a lifetime commitment to each other , and when all members of our communities are able to celebrate their identity and relationship within the institution of marriage .    my lords , i declare an interest . many years ago , i had the great good fortune to meet someone . she and i have loved each other ever since - that is , apart from the occasional spectacular argument , usually about driving or diy . as the slogans on the t-shirts used to say , it happens in the best of families . it was therefore with great relief that i read the letter from the bishop of salisbury to the noble lord , lord alli , in which he said : " whilst marriage is robust and enduring , what is meant by marriage has developed and changed significantly " . there have been many changes to what constitutes marriage over the years . in 1836 , there was the change that allowed civil marriage . in 1949 , there was the change that made 16 the minimum age for marriage . those changes came about because of campaigns that were run by minorities and resisted by majorities for a very long time , but they are not changes that would now be overturned . what we are doing today does not undermine any existing or future marriage . it extends the status of marriage to gay men and lesbians who want to make a  public commitment in the presence of their families and friends , and sometimes their co-religionists . it reflects the wishes of those people who today do not want just to tolerate lesbians and gay men ; they want to celebrate and support them as people in their own right . some noble lords say that allowing gay people to get married is unfair because it leaves other sorts of relationships , such as those of siblings , without the same legal rights as those who choose a marital status . if enabling gay marriage will be unfair to another relationship , such as that of two sisters , then existing marriage laws are unfair . i think we all understand that relationships which adults enter into voluntarily are wholly distinct from relationships which are determined by consanguinity . if family members could become civil partners , it would be really easy for a bullying parent or sibling to force a member of their family into a relationship simply in order to protect property . i do not think that any of us want to legislate for that . a great deal has been made about the issue of a conscience clause for registrars and other public servants . i grew up in a time and a place when discrimination in public services on the grounds of religion was not uncommon . it caused resentment and divided communities . the idea that public servants should decide , according to their personal beliefs , who does and does not receive a public service is just wrong . taxes are levied on a non-discriminatory basis and services should be provided on a non-discriminatory basis . some opponents of this bill say that we should not be addressing this - not when we have these huge economic difficulties . i disagree . discrimination always comes with a price tag . in the united states , hundreds of employers - some very small ; some of the biggest in the world , such as nike and microsoft - are assisting legal cases in support of gay marriage . these employers need to recruit and retain the most productive staff to make their businesses competitive - and that includes lgbt staff . these businesses want their gay employees to be able to focus on their jobs , not to be dealing with the inequality that means that they and their families always have to sit at the back of the bus . if those businesses have figured out that same-sex marriage is good for business , so should we . this is a bill about religious freedom . as somebody who was raised a methodist , that is something that has been important to me all my life . no religion will be compelled to offer a same-sex marriage . on the same basis , it would be wrong to deny the rights of those religious organisations that wish to extend their fellowship to gay people and their families . there is no impediment which would prevent this house from doing its job and subjecting this bill to the high standards of scrutiny that it would apply to any other . in doing so , members of your lordships ' house will think long and hard , as they always do , about what is right and in the best interests of our society . i and many of my colleagues on these benches look forward to joining with noble lords from all parts of the house to ensure that gay people and their families are afforded the dignity and respect that others take for granted , and that families , faiths and communities can grow stronger together as a result .   my lords , i will be brief . first , i congratulate the most reverend primate on his speech . it was , as we might have guessed , impressive , well argued and , above all , compassionate . i thank him for that , but fear that i disagree with his conclusion . before i get to that , perhaps i could deal first with the amendment of the noble lord , lord dear . i have a deep respect for this house . i do not share the dismissive and , frankly , offensive views of the noble lord , lord oakeshott , on the " today " programme , which was the first interview i heard on flying in from washington just in time for this debate . i accept and recognise that this is an appointed house , and it is an enormous privilege to be appointed to it . however , with that privilege come limitations on what we can do . of course we can question legislation and seek to improve it . however , in my view , we cannot defeat at second reading the declared will of the house of commons when , on a free vote , it has voted by over two to one to pass this legislation . the noble lord , lord dear , expressed doubts about the voting . i was in the commons for 31 years and the allegations he repeated sound very much like the consistent complaint made by those who have been defeated in a free vote . no party and no set of whips would respect someone who could be persuaded by pressure to change his view on a free vote . that part of the noble lord 's speech is frankly nonsense . i believe mps have the authority that comes from their election and which they retain as long as they are mps . much is said  about public opinion , and we have heard it already , but we should recognise that they and they alone are answerable to the public on this issue and not us in this house . we cannot take over that role ; that is not our position . i thought that this was exactly the case some of us were putting a few months ago to avoid the prospect of two elected houses standing side by side . we would be profoundly wrong , if not politically suicidal , to vote against a second reading . however , i do not argue the case purely on those grounds - i also strongly believe in the bill itself . parliament should value people equally in the law and enabling same-sex marriage removes a current inequity . i believe that there are many gay and lesbian couples who want more than civil partnership , although it is something of a wonder to me to see how civil partnerships have suddenly become so popular among those i do not remember supporting them up until now . we should recognise that there are many deeply religious gay and lesbian couples , including people in the church , who want the commitment that marriage offers . this bill , rather than weakening the institution of marriage , strengthens it , and our purpose as a parliament should be to encourage the stability it can bring . just before i left washington i had a meeting with a senior doctor who happens to be gay . washington dc already has a law enabling equal marriage , as do other american states and they appear to have managed perfectly well . as it happens , he had not pushed for the change but he said that , quite apart from the rights of the individual , it sent out a much wider message for gays and lesbians that , in his words : " we are like everyone else " . that was the point and the message that was being put out . an obvious fact , you might say , but one that is denied by many countries around the world . it is denied by their governments and their people and sometimes , i regret to say , by their churches . over the past few months i have travelled to some of those countries and have seen the prejudice . i acknowledge freely the profound impact that that has had on me , which very much affects my attitude this afternoon . i say to the noble lord , lord dear , that this is my argument regarding the foreign experience and not the travesty of it which he sought to set out . i have seen equality fiercely denied in eastern europe ; in a country such as ukraine , which he mentioned , too often politicians show their contempt for gay people and violence against them is the result . i have particularly seen equality denied in countries in sub-saharan africa such as uganda . for several years there was a popular paper there whose sole purpose was to expose gay people , photograph them , give their addresses and invite the violence against them that followed . homosexuality is a criminal offence there and of course the british first made it one , as we have in other african countries . i am not optimistic enough to believe that our decision here tomorrow will break down the persecution , hostility and discrimination . however , it will show decisively how this country has changed , and the value we place on gay and lesbian people in our society . i believe that it will show support for the persecuted minorities around the world - and make no mistake , they exist . at home , i believe it will show the gay and lesbian community our belief in equality - i thought that the noble lord , lord dear , was a little complacent  about the position on that - and , above all , their right to expect what we all expect ; nothing more , but certainly nothing less . for some of us , that is a fundamental moral issue .   my lords , this issue raises a great deal of passion because it touches on things that we all care about : equality , human rights and our religious beliefs . the noble lord , lord pannick , and i were invited before the committee that examined this bill before its passage through the house of commons . we were asked to present a legal view on the likely success of any challenge to the special protections being given to religious organisations - the churches and so on - in the bill . we both took the opportunity to speak to legal organisations , to colleagues in the law and to people who often took different positions and different sides on many issues concerning rights . we were both firmly of the view that the protections provided by the bill to churches , religious organisations and church ministers are strong and should reassure this house that there is no real risk of a successful challenge . there is no obligation whatever on religious organisations to host gay marriages if they do not wish to do so . the legal position is that it is permissible but absolutely not required in law . any requirement on a church , religious organisation or minister to conduct same-sex marriage contrary to the religious convictions of its members would violate article 9 of the european convention on human rights . the protections of that article are very strong and any analysis of the jurisprudence will show that the desire to maintain those protections is strong . the case brought by the muslim community against the bulgarian government , which went all the way to the european court of human rights , laid down an important principle : the autonomous exercise of religious freedoms , and that exercise by religious communities , is indispensable for pluralism in a democratic society . why , then , is this bill going through ? it is going through because over my lifetime as a practitioner in the law we have seen a huge change in the position of gay people in our communities . it is interesting to note in this house , where the average age is above 60 , that people above the age of 60 express the greatest concern about any change in the law . people under the age of 60 by and large favour this change . you have to ask yourself why that might be . i think it is because of the growing tolerance in our society and the desire to see people treated as equals regardless of race , sexuality or gender . that is something that we should cherish and see as an enormous achievement for our society . the claim is that marriage is a union between a man and a woman by tradition , custom and practice . the noble lord , lord dear , articulated it at the beginning of the debate . of course , initially the idea was that marriage was about protecting property and making claims on children , and its purpose was to produce and provide a framework for the protection of property and in which children could be raised in a decent and wholesome way . that conception of marriage came into being before we knew as much as we now do about the human condition . we have now separated  out the sexual act for the purposes of procreation from the sexual act as a source of sexual fulfilment . even the churches would acknowledge that . a woman or man can nowadays know for sure that they cannot conceive a child , but none of us would expect that to reduce in any way their entitlement to marry . a couple may decide to marry and enjoy what they see marriage as providing for their relationship , even if they know that they will not have children . we know those - there are many in this house - who , on the death of their partner , have gone on to marry again after the age at which they would ever have children or provide the framework for the conventional family . they do so because they want to create a special commitment to the person whom they choose to marry . we have to ask ourselves whether some of the reasons and rationales for maintaining something are not disguising other concerns . we have changed the meaning of marriage . we have changed it intentionally to be inclusive and to make it possible for people who want to make a commitment in love to another to be able to enter into this public declaration in the way that we do . we must also remind ourselves what it is touching upon . it is touching upon the desire in most human beings to love and be loved . it is part of the whole nature of our humanity . that people , gay or straight , should want to do that - to declare it in the presence of those they consider to be their community and to be part of the whole that is our society - is surely an advance on marriage as it is currently constructed . it means that , in fact , we are enhancing rather then diminishing the meaning of marriage . therefore , as i close these few comments i say that , having reviewed the law , article 9 of the european convention - which protects religions - is about the needs of community and society , and how they have to be balanced with individual needs . in doing that , the churches can have the protection that they have so earnestly sought from the secretary of state . however , we are also strengthening our society by giving the right to marry to those who earnestly want it and want to be able to live openly and publicly in a declaration of love . i submit to the house that that has to be something that the law should support .   my lords , last month it was wonderful to hear the general acclamation in the house for the first reading of the alan turing (statutory pardon) bill . it was the first time in my brief two and a half years in your lordships ' chamber that i have heard such a response to the first reading of a bill . it demonstrates how societal attitudes towards homosexuality have moved on over the past 60 years . it was brought home to me five years ago when my husband and i celebrated our silver wedding anniversary and two close gay friends invited us to their civil partnership , with a date chosen to mark 25 years of their private commitment to one another . over that 25-year period they have been harassed and attacked , and are so cautious still that they would rather that i did not mention them by name . that ceremony was a moving event , but it was not marriage ; it was a legal arrangement  that helped provide them with certain protections , but it was not the commitment that you have with marriage . i support civil partnerships but believe that marriage should be available to those who want to make that greater commitment . the core of marriage to me as a christian - and , by the by , as a member of the church of england - is that the commitment made by two people of their undying love to each other , through good times and bad , through sickness and health , stable and faithful , as the most reverend primate the archbishop mentioned , is a building block of our society . i respect those for whom the theological arguments are core to their beliefs and practice but , frankly , i struggle to find those arguments expressed by jesus himself in the new testament . i also want to quote from the letter of the bishop of salisbury , who i suspect will be quoted frequently today . he says : " the desire for the public acknowledgment and support of stable , faithful , adult , loving same sex sexual relationships is not addressed by the six biblical passages about homosexuality which are concerned with sexual immorality , promiscuity , idolatry , exploitation and abuse . the theological debate is properly located in the biblical accounts of marriage , which is why so many christians see marriage as essentially heterosexual . however , christian morality comes from the mix of bible , christian tradition and our reasoned experience . sometimes christians have had to rethink the priorities of the gospel in the light of experience " . he goes on to cite slavery and the apartheid system in south africa . i would add to that the church 's view , and that of society , about contraception early in the 20th century . my noble kinswoman baroness stocks was roundly and publicly harassed for working alongside marie stopes for early contraception . society today would be horrified if that were to be repeated . there are other faith groups that agree that same sex marriage is important . i briefly quote from rabbi lea mühlstein , from the progressive west london synagogue , who says : " judaism holds that every person was created in the image of god . it is clear to me that the divine image in all of us demands from each of us that we be treated equally before the law . as such , i am divinely obligated to respect the needs and wishes of my congregants - whether they be straight or gay , lesbian or bisexual " . the quakers , as ever , set the pace on this . in 1963 , in their paper , towards a quaker view of sex , they said : " surely it is the nature and quality of a relationship that matters ; one must not judge by its outward appearance but by its inner worth ... we see no reason why the physical nature of a sexual act should be the criterion by which the question whether or not it is moral should be decided . an act which expresses true affection between two individuals and gives pleasure to them both , does not seem to us to be sinful by reason alone of the fact that it is homosexual " . the quakers see god in everyone , and all commitments to relationships as of equal worth . so i am pleased that the quakers have said publicly that they will opt into the registration arrangements and carry out equal marriage with enthusiasm . the quadruple lock protects and facilitates same-sex marriage for religious groups . speaking as a member of the church of england , i hope that we might begin a debate that acknowledges the breadth of views within our church , even if the noise from those opposed to equal marriage is louder than that made by those of us who believe that love and marriage is god-given to all .  very briefly , i turn to clause 12 in part 2 , which rights a dreadful wrong faced by transgender people in a marriage . it has caused immense distress to those already facing the turmoil of major changes in their lives . i am delighted that these proposals now accept that changed gender status should not imperil an existing marriage . i , like others , am concerned about voting at second reading . my point is that as peers we should not be voting on whether we like or dislike the bill . it is important that we give this house the chance to debate and amend as we see fit - a strength that this house has shown to another place on many occasions . our society has moved on even in the eight years since the introduction of civil partnerships . surveys show that a majority of people welcome same-sex marriage - including , as has already been mentioned , three out of five of those with faith . it is important that we move forward to hearing that public voice . now is the time for equal marriage . please do not let my friends have to wait another 20 years , until their golden anniversary , before they can choose to marry .   my lords , i warmly welcome the bill for the reasons stated by the minister and the noble baroness , lady royall , in their admirable speeches opening the debate . i much regret that the noble lord , lord dear , should think it appropriate to seek to deny a second reading to a bill which has received overwhelming support in the other place on a free vote . the noble lord emphasised what he described as the majority view in the country at large . i have to tell him and others who share his views that the world out there has moved on and that for most people , particularly those under 60 , the sexuality of their neighbours is neither a concern nor a threat , as the noble baroness , lady kennedy , said . it bemuses people that any element of unequal treatment should remain in our society simply by reference to people 's sexual orientation . many people outside the house listening to the debate or reading it in hansard in due course will wonder why the noble lord , lord dear , and his supporters , all of whom rightly value the institution of marriage , seek to deny the same happiness , fulfilment and status to other people simply by reference to their sexual orientation . i am a paid-up member of the married club and glad to be so . it is precisely because of the value of marriage that it should not be denied to same-sex couples . there is no question of the bill being introduced on a whim , as the noble lord suggested . it is being introduced on a fundamental question of principle to address a wrong that needs to be addressed .  i wish to comment on a theme which appears to drive the bill 's opponents . the noble lord , lord dear , referred to what he described as centuries of tradition and the concept of marriage as we have always known it , and the noble lord , lord waddington , made similar points . this is to treat the law of marriage like the law of the medes and the persians which , according to the book of daniel , chapter 6 , verse 8 - the devil can quote scripture - " altereth not " . the reality is that the law of marriage in this country has altereth a lot . it has altereth a lot from time to time according to changes in social conditions and social attitudes . the noble baroness , lady barker , made this point in her powerful contribution to the debate . prior to legislation in 1907 , a man could not marry his deceased wife 's sister . prior to 1921 , a man could not marry his deceased brother 's widow . other prohibited degrees were removed in 1931 . all of this information is in the valuable halsbury 's laws of england edited by the noble and learned lord , lord mackay of clashfern . the gender recognition act 2004 allowed a transsexual to marry in his or her acquired sex even though , i remind the noble lord , lord waddington , procreation is plainly not possible in such circumstances . the minimum age for marriage has been altered from time to time ; the law related to the validity of non-anglican marriages has developed over time ; the law of divorce has been amended from time to time ; other incidents of marriage have been the subject of change . until case law in the 1990s when the first judgment in the modern era was given by the noble and learned lord , lord brown of eaton-under-heywood , the law proceeded on the basis that a husband could not be criminally liable for raping his wife if he had sexual intercourse with her without her consent . it is , therefore , simply unsustainable for critics of the bill to suggest that there is anything unprincipled in parliament amending the law of marriage in a fundamental manner to recognise social developments and to do it in accordance with basic principle . i will make one other point if i may . i have provoked the noble lord . lord dear : as we are both benchers of gray 's inn , the noble lord would have to go a long way to provoke me . before we go any further , may i ask the noble lord if he has taken notice of the fact that at no stage in my address did i say that because the law and custom of marriage were well established we should continue in the same vein ? the main thrust of my address was that sufficient research has not been carried out into the laws of unintended consequences . could he address that ? lord pannick : i cannot address every point made by the noble lord . if he fails , as i hope he does , to prevent the house from debating the detail and the arguments in committee and on report , i very much hope that the house will address every point made by him . i focused on his completely unsustainable suggestion that there are " centuries of tradition " and that the concept of marriage as we have always known it is being removed . i am quite happy to try to deal with  every point if noble lords want me to make a speech of 30 or 40 minutes but i will not trespass on the tolerance of the house to do so . i do not accept that there are unintended consequences . i will deal finally with just one suggestion of an unintended consequence made by the noble lord and other critics - that the bill is going to force religious bodies to conduct same-sex marriages contrary to their religious principles . the noble baroness , lady kennedy , mentioned that we both gave oral evidence on this subject to the house of commons public bill committee . i explained my view that there was no realistic possibility whatever that any court , domestic or european , would compel a church or other religious body to conduct a same-sex marriage ceremony contrary to the doctrines of that religious faith . the reason is very simple : under this bill , a same-sex couple will be able to enter into a civil marriage . their only reason for wanting a religious ceremony would be to gain a religious benefit . all , and i mean all , case law confirms that courts will leave religious bodies to decide on the allocation of religious benefits . none of the other legal concerns raised by the opponents of the bill seems to have any basis whatever . i am confident that this house will give a second reading to the bill tomorrow and i very much look forward to a reasoned debate in committee on all questions of detail .    my lords , i shall come back to the speech of the right reverend prelate at the end of my remarks . like all of us , i have had a very large amount of correspondence on this subject , much of it by e-mail . thanks to the whitsun recess , i have been able to reply to a great many of these - not all , but most . my own starting point is something that i learnt many years ago as an undergraduate faced with what was , for me , a new involvement with people who were not heterosexual . i asked my grandfather , who was an extremely wise lecturer at the edinburgh medical school , all about it . he said , " my dear boy , it is as foolish to condemn those who have homosexual proclivities as it is to condemn them for having red hair " . i have lived with that all my life and i have always opposed discrimination against homosexuals . in the exchanges i have had through e-mail and other communications , i have identified three clear lines of argument against the bill . the first i can deal with very briefly . there have been references to homophobia : i am afraid that some of the messages i have received actually reek of homophobia . i was reminded of some of the arguments advanced when parliament abolished the criminal liability for homosexual conduct between consenting adults . there were those same dreadful arguments , deeply shaming , and i am very sorry that they still exist . the second argument is one that has been referred to several times in this debate so far . the question is : does the bill redefine marriage ? it was put to me by one correspondent that : " the government 's plans will redefine the marriages of the 24 million married people without their consent " . other people have referred to their anniversaries . last year , my wife and i celebrated our diamond wedding , and i have to say that it has been a marriage with mutual comfort and support . is this bill going to redefine that marriage ? i cannot see how that could possibly happen . i was grateful to my noble friend on the front bench for confirming that nothing in this bill will redefine our marriage or indeed those of the other 24 million married people in this country . one has to regard that argument as really quite misconceived . as others have said , it is not irrelevant that there is a great deal more support for the bill among young people who are facing marriage , are about to get married or hope to get married than there is among the population generally . they do not see it like that . one has only to think of the possibility of the following  happening . a young man poses the question to his intended , " will you marry me ? " and she replies , " oh no . this bill has made it all totally different . it 's for gays and lesbians - i can 't possibly marry you " . that is pure fantasy and i do not think we should pay too much attention to it . the other argument that i have been rather more impressed by , and which again has been mentioned , is the question of the potential liability and difficulties for people , particularly in the public service , who find themselves , in a sense , implementing the provisions of the bill in one way or another . a number of people , including some of those who have expressed support for the bill , have voiced these concerns to me , and that is something that this house will need to look at quite carefully . i was very much comforted by the assurance given to us by my noble friend on the front bench that ministers are considering what more might be done to allay those anxieties . i regard that as very important . finally , i return to the right reverend prelate the bishop of leicester . i hope that he will not feel it is unfair if i call him my " old friend " , as indeed he is . i have come to the firm conclusion that there is nothing to fear in gay marriage and that , indeed , it will be a positive good not just for same-gender unions but for the institution of marriage generally . the effect will be to put right at the centre of marriage the concept of a stable , loving relationship . as a practising christian , perhaps i may make the point to the bishops ' benches , including to the most reverend primate , that there is every reason why , in time , the anglican church should come to accept that , although i recognise that it may take some time . the character of love which marriage reflects - that it is faithful , stable , tough , unselfish and unconditional - is the same character that most christians see in the love of god . marriage is therefore holy , not because it is ordained by god , but because it reflects that most important central truth of our religion : the love of god for all of us .     my lords , i understand very well the unease that many of your lordships feel about this bill . i was brought up in a world where homosexuality was whispered about in dark corners and any hint of its expression resulted in expulsion . our understanding of homosexuality is undoubtedly the biggest social change of my lifetime . my own change and understanding came about when i realised - for example , through reading the biographies of gay people - that often , from a very early age , they had found themselves predominantly attracted to members of their own sex , not just physically but as whole persons . while some people are bisexual and there is a degree of fluidity in the sexuality of others , we know that for a significant minority their sexuality is not a matter of choice but as fundamental to their identity as being male or female . that is a fact that must bring about a decisive shift in our understanding . the question arises as to how the church and society should respond to this . both have an interest in helping people live stable lives in committed relationships . for this reason , many of us warmly welcome civil partnerships , not just because of the legal protections that they rightly afford to those who enter into them but because they offer the opportunity for people to commit themselves to one another publicly . personally , i take a high view of civil partnerships . the idea of a lifelong partnership is a beautiful one . i deeply regret that the church of england has not yet found a way of publicly affirming civil partnerships in a christian context . i wish that it had warmly welcomed them from the first and provided a liturgical service in which the couple could commit themselves to one another before god and ask for god 's blessing upon their life together . if only the church had made it clear that although these relationships might be different in some respects from the union of a man and woman , they are equally valid in the eyes of the church and , more importantly , in the eyes of god . sadly , too many who now say that they accept civil partnerships have done so only slowly , reluctantly and through gritted teeth . today we are not in a situation where civil partnerships are regarded as different but equal to marriage . rightly or wrongly , the impression  is inevitably created that one form of relationship is inferior to the other , and people believe that marriage is a profounder and richer form of relationship than a civil partnership . most importantly , many gay and lesbian people believe this and want to enter not just into a civil partnership but a marriage : a lifelong commitment of love and fidelity , for better , for worse , for richer , for poorer , in sickness and in health . marriage affords legal advantages that are denied to civil partnerships , such as their legal status in many countries , but that is not the main point . the point is that those who wish to enter into this most fundamental of human relationships should be able to do so legally . i am aware that this involves a significant change in our understanding of marriage , but marriage has never had a fixed character . the noble lord , lord pannick , eloquently pointed out that its legal meaning has changed over the years ; and no less significantly , its social meaning has changed . for most of history , among the upper classes , marriage was primarily a way of controlling titles and wealth . among all classes , it involved the radical subservience of women . often it went along with a very lax attitude - by males , not females - to relationships outside marriage . contraception was forbidden and this resulted in many children , and as often as not the wife dying young . only in the 18th century did we get a growth in emphasis on the quality of the relationship of the couple . now , this mutual society , help and comfort that the one ought to have with the other , in prosperity and adversity , is rightly stressed . this is equally valued by all people , whatever their sexuality . i really do not underestimate the linguistic dissonance set up by this bill and the consequent unease felt by many but , for those reasons that i have briefly outlined , i warmly welcome it . i believe in marriage . i believe , with the jewish rabbi of old , that in the love of a couple there dwells the shekinah - the divine presence ; or , to put it in christian terms , that which reflects the mutual love of christ and his church . i believe in the institution of marriage and i want it to be available to same-sex couples as well as to males and females .  my lords , we come back to the bill . this is a bill that divides friends , families , political parties , different faiths and , indeed , the church of england . the problem seems to be that there are different views on what the word marriage means and what it stands for . to many it is an adjective that describes an event - not necessarily a religious event - that takes place in a registry office , on a lawn , on a beach , in a hotel or , i am told , even in a swimming pool . sometimes it is a religious event in a church . sometimes it is the only occasion on which the couple actually go to church . sometimes the couple already have children or have been married before or are of different religious faiths . thus the word marriage is used by many different people to describe many different types of event . there are also those who believe that marriage is a sacred religious ceremony and that marriage must be between a man and a woman for the procreation of children . therefore , we have different groups of people using the same word in different contexts . that is the fundamental issue that divides us and causes us concern today .  it is a difficult issue . was there a huge clamour for the bill ? no , it came only from a few . most affected seemed happy with civil partnerships . was it sensible to introduce it as a government bill ? that will be debated , i suspect , for many months . however , we have a bill that has gone through another place and arrived in this house , and we have to deal with it .  i understand those who have strong feelings against the bill , but i will make one important point . i understand and sympathise with those who want to get married but feel excluded by their church . it happened to me . some 37 years ago i went to see our local vicar to arrange my marriage . i told him that my future wife was a roman catholic . he said that that did not matter and that we could go ahead . then i then told him that she had been married before and had two small children . he immediately withdrew his offer of marriage and rather reluctantly offered a service of blessing . i felt upset and excluded . the roman catholic church offered my wife an annulment , and said that it would then be happy to conduct the marriage . it seemed odd to have an annulment when one already had two children . luckily , the church of scotland came to our rescue and we were duly married . now the church of england has changed its rules so that divorcees can marry . the church has evolved . it has changed its view on this and on many other issues . we now have women priests , and perhaps one day we will have women bishops .  where do i stand in this debate ? to many the bill is welcome . we must not forget that there are a substantial number of children living with same-sex couples who want their parents to have the full recognition of marriage and the protection that that gives the family . then we have the contrary view . to many , this bill is divisive and unnecessary . as a conservative , i believe in freedom and tolerance - two aspects not always very relevant in many marriages . " compromise " might be the term most popular in my marriage , as i always seem to be the one who is compromising .  the churches and other faiths should be able to decide whether or not they want to have same-sex marriage ceremonies in their church . it should be up to them . it should not be imposed by the state . if they do not wish to conduct the ceremony , they should not be forced to . the strong and clear clauses in the bill provide for that protection . i have listened to those who claim that the european court of human rights might overrule british law . if it does , i would be delighted , as then we could all agree to leave this outdated and flawed institution that has allowed so many dangerous terrorists to remain in this country .  therefore , i support the second reading of the bill . more importantly , it would be quite wrong and highly damaging to the reputation of the house not to allow the bill to proceed to committee , where all the arguments for and against can be fully debated . we are a revising chamber . we have an absolute right to send an amended bill back to another place - but after debate , report and third reading . the noble lord , lord dear , said the bill would , " take up valuable time " . i say to the noble lord that we have the time , and i am sorry that he has not got the time to deal with the many complex clauses and issues in the bill .  to reject a bill on second reading that has been passed by another place - however strong the opinions - would have a grave knock-on effect on the relationship between the two houses . rejection at second reading has occurred occasionally , but it is against the traditions of the house and has happened very rarely . we must give the bill a second reading . if we do not , we would be seen as undemocratic and not as the guardian of democracy , which is how we are now often seen . if we did not accept the bill , we would hasten the threatened changes to the nature and composition of the house , against which so many of us have fought for so long .  i will continue in a similar vein . regrettably , the noble lord , lord dear , is not with us . i had a number of letters from him seeking to persuade me to his view , that i should vote for what i now see as his wrecking amendment to the bill , even though the bill had been adopted by a very sizeable majority in the elected chamber and , unusually , on a cross-party basis and without the normal , formal whipping taking place .  it is true that there was not any mention of this legislation in any of the parties ' manifestos , but that is not necessarily unusual . after all , as the noble lord , lord dear , pointed out , we recently dealt with a major piece of legislation relating to the national health service and social care . there was no mention of that in anybody 's manifesto , but such a major change none the less came through to us . in many respects the changes emanating from that may have an even greater effect on society at the moment than what will emanate from the legislation before us today .  i suspect also that many of the people who may be tempted to vote with the noble lord , lord dear , voted for legislation - the care bill - that had not been in any manifesto . i hope that they will weigh those issues up in their heads before they decide whether they move forward . also , had the house of lords reform bill come up from the commons , even though such an attempt to move towards a more democratic chamber had been in all the parties ' manifestos , i rather suspect that there would have been a majority of noble lords still opposing it . overall , we should be prepared to dismiss the argument that this is undemocratic and has not gone through the proper procedures , and move on to committee and start to examine it .  i will be brief because such magnificent speeches have been made already from different points of view , but particularly in support of the bill . i am generally in favour of it . i have been married for nearly 47 years - sometimes on a rollercoaster , but protected from strain on the journey together mainly because i was in a marriage . i am strongly in favour if it - and in favour of it for all , regardless of gender . i believe that there should be equal treatment before the law and , even more importantly , equal treatment before god . on the general social good side , to which the most reverend primate referred , research shows that marriage encourages and strengthens lifelong relationships and makes for a better society - it is particularly important for this . it is better for families and for individuals . if we accept that , surely we should do everything that we can to encourage more marriage , as the noble baroness , lady kennedy of the shaws , argued , rather than oppose this extension of marriage , and possibly create different groupings within it , which may bring difficulties .  i accept that equal marriage will change marriage to a degree . we would be misleading ourselves if we thought that everything would be precisely the same in future . it will not - it will change . but as the noble lord , lord pannick , so ably demonstrated in his contribution , there have been many changes to marriage over the generations , and this is just one on the route as we move forward . overall , it will have a positive impact on society , and it will strengthen and encourage lifelong relationships and commitments .  the noble lord , lord jenkin of roding , listed what he believed were the ingredients for a successful marriage . i boiled down the items he listed to two major ones . love and tolerance are the essence , as i see it , of a successful marriage - to which , from my own experience , i would add faith . i was interested to hear the most reverend primate say at the beginning that this is not a faith issue but concerns general social good . i would argue that that is not so and that the principal churches in the country are holding back in an area where they should be moving forward . i trust that in due course they will move forward to embrace the totality of the population who come under god 's guidance and leadership .  we should have faith that we can get this bill right - and faith , too , that the changes will make for a better society in future . as i prayed with my wife this morning , i asked what jesus christ would do . if he was here today , which way would he vote , and would he cast the first stone ?  my lords , i am a passionate supporter of the bill . i support it because i believe in the institution of marriage , which is the bedrock of society and should be open to all . i support it because i believe in the values of the family , and the bill will , in my view , strengthen them . i support it because i am a conservative . respect for individual liberty is at the core of my being and this is a bill that will add to the sum of human freedom . i support it because i am a christian and i believe we are all equal in the eyes of god , and should be so under man 's laws . i support it because i am one of those people who i fear were rather glibly derided by the noble lord , lord dear , as being part of a tiny minority and , i think , were praised by my noble friend lady knight as being delightful , in that i am gay . i am in a civil partnership with somebody with whom i have been together for nearly a quarter of a century . i love him very much and nothing would give me greater pride than to marry him . i hope noble lords will forgive that personal pronouncement , but it seems to me that my experience goes to the heart of this debate .  of course , there are strong views on both sides which i respect and the debate today has illustrated them , but by far the most important aspect of this debate are the thousands of our fellow citizens , of whom i am one , who are not yet fully equal . the bill is about human beings , not ideology . although some noble lords may disagree with me when i talk about the press , i assure noble lords that in the main i really am exactly the same as them , except that i happen to love a man . why should i be barred from taking part in a special institution that all the rest of you can enjoy ? it seems to me that that is the nub of the matter . the speech of the noble lord , lord dear , contained throughout words such as " tolerate " and " toleration " . goodness me , this is 2013 . gay people do not want to be tolerated in this society ; they want to be equal in it . my noble friend lady cumberlege , for whom i have most enormous respect , not least for her trojan work on osteoporosis , talks about gay people setting up different institutions . we do not want different institutions ; we want the same institutions . provided it passes , this law will accord me , for the first time in my life , complete equality and respect regardless of my sexuality for what the noble lord , lord jenkin , in an incredibly powerful speech , described as the character of love that i feel able to give . i hope so much that this house , which has always valued the sanctity of the individual , will allow that to happen .  my personal experience aside , there are two strong reasons of principle why i support the bill . first , as a conservative , i believe in human liberty . some words of the great liberal thinker , j s mill , with which i concur , are deeply relevant to this debate . he stated that ,  " the sole end for which mankind are warranted , individually or collectively , in interfering with the liberty of action of any of their number , is self-protection " .  the state should interfere in people 's lives only where it is preventing harm ; for example , banning smoking in public places or criminalising drugs . marriage between two men or two women who love each other does not produce social harm . it is not endangering anyone . why should the state actively stop it ? that point was echoed in a recent interview in the new york times with the daughter of that great conservative icon , president reagan , who was one of my heroes . as we know , he was a social conservative to his core , but he also respected individual liberty and , according to his daughter , would have supported equal marriage . why would he have done so ? he would have done so because of his ,  " distaste for government intrusion into private lives " . patti davis said that he and nancy brought up their children to understand that there was absolutely nothing wrong with the idea that ,  " some men are born wanting to love another man " .  that is quite right . if we respect individuality , the structure of our legal institutions must reflect that and it does not . the bill puts that right by removing value judgments by the state , making the law neutral and allowing all those who want to make a lifelong , loving commitment to each other to marry .  the second reason i support the bill is because of the power of legislation to change attitudes , something we have heard a little about . when i started in politics in the late 1980s , i learnt at the feet of the noble lord , lord tebbit , for whom i have the most extraordinary respect . at that time , most gay men had little choice but to hide their sexuality . noble lords should understand how soul destroying it can be to cover up an aspect of your life . the reason that young people can mostly live openly gay lives today is because legislation from this house and the house of commons led opinion . the bold reforms of john major 's government , the repeal of section 28 and the introduction of civil partnerships by the labour government were all in advance of mainstream opinion but have created a more inclusive , more liberal society by being so . this measure will have the same impact . young gay people at school or university , battling with their consciences as well as , still too often , prejudice , will look to parliament and see that in the eyes of the uk 's lawmakers , they are treated with respect , dignity and equality . as the prime minister rightly put it , they will stand taller as a result of our actions . i pay tribute to his huge courage in bringing forward the bill in the face of much prejudice and misinformation .  i conclude with this thought . the day my partner and i entered a civil partnership in 2006 was immensely special . it produced a tangible strengthening and deepening of our relationship in a way that i did not believe was possible . people sometimes ask me , " isn 't that enough ? " , and we have heard echoes of that today . why cannot gay people be happy with what we have already been granted ? my answer is that it was the experience of civil partnership which convinced me of the need to go further . if a civil ceremony can produce such a deep change in the relationship between two people , imagine what a proper marriage , morally equal in the eyes of one 's family and friends , could do . that is why i can put my hand on my heart and tell noble lords that this measure will not undermine marriage , it will strengthen it . it will not undermine the family , it will strengthen it . i know that to be true because i have felt it . that is why i beseech noble lords to join me tomorrow in voting to give the bill a second reading .   my lords , that is a very moving speech to follow . i have great difficulty with the bill , over which i have anguished . however , for the constitutional reason set out by the noble lord , lord fowler , i shall vote for its second reading and for it to go into committee . the truth is that i cannot get my head round two people of the same sex being in a relationship defined as a marriage , however much they love each other . i hold to a simple traditional view that the word " marriage " can apply only in heterosexual relationships . i need to make it absolutely clear that , as a labour peer , i have always supported equality for gay men and women . i have voted repeatedly and consistently over 30 years for the developing gay agenda . i have a whole file of letters from stonewall and others thanking me for my support as each and every measure has been brought before parliament . i have huge admiration for peter tatchell 's drive and courage , and will never forget the experience of knocking on doors in the bermondsey by-election some 30 years ago when he was the subject of a vitriolic gay-bashing campaign run by the then liberal party . we have come a long way since then .  my problem is over the use of the word " marriage " . i see it as distinct from civil partnership . i have no problem with the union between two persons of the same sex being given full recognition before god and being blessed in church or wherever . i have no problem with pension-splitting , inheritance tax management or anything that seeks equality with heterosexual couples , provided that we have safeguards against abuse just as we have under current marriage arrangements . furthermore , i do not want to test the patience of the house by repeating arguments that have already been made on the need to maintain a distinction between marriage and civil partnership .  however , i need to call in aid speeches made by two members of the other house , both leading gay rights campaigners , during the passage of the civil partnership bill in 2004 . the first was by alan duncan mp , who stated from the conservative front bench , when defining the distinction between marriage and civil partnership , that ,  " the two institutions are designed on similar lines , but they are designed on parallel lines ; and parallel lines , as we all know , never meet . they are separate institutions for different groups of people . gay men and lesbians are different precisely because of who they love , so the formal recognition of that love will itself create differences " . - [  official report   , commons , 12/10/04 ; col . 184 .]  he went on to argue further that ,  " the clear distinction between a civil ... partnership and the institution of marriage will , in my view , be preserved " . - [  official report   , commons , 12/10/04 ; col . 185 .]  so when he was considering that bill he recognised the validity of the distinction that i believe in .  then we have the comments of chris bryant mp in the same debate , who said :  " i do not want same-sex relationships to ape marriage in any sense - several people have used the offensive phrase - because they are different . although the two share similar elements , they do not have to be identical , so the legal provisions should be distinct " . - [official report , commons , 12/10/04 ; col . 228 .]  later , on report , chris bryant , who has led the campaign on these matters in the other house , made himself absolutely clear when he stated that ,  " i believe that marriage should be only between a man and a woman " . - [official report , commons , 9/11/04 ; col . 810 .]  for some reason , he has changed his mind over the past eight years but his position then is my position now . we are arguing over the use of a word - an argument that we thought was settled in 2004 when we approved the civil partnership bill . some of us want to retain the word for heterosexual unions , maintaining the distinction . others want to fuse the two and end the distinction . the noble lord , lord filkin , was quoted by the noble lord , lord waddington , earlier .  i will support the bill going into committee . the bill is not a manifesto bill but a free-vote bill , and was carried by an overwhelming majority in the house of commons . two-thirds of the house of commons voted for it , one of the biggest majorities in years . it was sent to us to be scrutinised - not blocked or destroyed . it would be a complete betrayal of our responsibilities if this unelected house , where we all sit by way of patronage , was to block a bill carried on a free vote in the elected house of commons on the scale that it was a month ago . our role is to revise bills , not kill bills , and i appeal to the noble lord , lord dear , not to push his amendment to the vote .  my lords , i happen to be gay . i was made this way . it is something i share with hundreds of thousands of our fellow citizens who are worthwhile , virtuous , hard-working , responsible , loving members of society . it is also , incidentally , why i am the honorary vice-president of the campaign for homosexual equality . i am also a christian and i believe in a loving , accepting , generous god who wants to include people , not reject them . i was in a civil partnership and i know that civil partnership confers nearly all the shared rights and responsibilities that marriage does , but it is not the same . it is not equality : it does not carry the same significance or symbolism and it still labels lesbian and gay relationships as somehow just a little second-class .  the noble lord , lord campbell-savours , spoke about the speeches made by alan duncan and chris bryant when civil partnership legislation passed through the house of commons . yes , some people - many people - have changed their minds since then . they have done so because of two things . first , it is because society has moved and changed . the attitude from an overwhelming range of our society , especially among young people , has moved on even since eight years ago . secondly , the success of civil partnerships themselves has demonstrated that where loving commitment can be made and recognised it is to be celebrated and welcomed by society . some of the things that have been said in the course of public discussion by some - though certainly by no means all - opponents of this bill have , i fear , been mistaken , misguided and , sometimes , rather hurtful . this has reinforced my view that this change is sorely needed .  i want to make three brief points . first , quite simply , this is about love , commitment and mutual respect . it is about two people wanting to commit themselves to each other and to demonstrate the strength of that commitment to the world . this is something to celebrate , surely , not to reject ; to welcome and endorse , not to sideline . to vote against the bill is , effectively , to say that two people , two members of our human family , cannot be allowed the full flowering of the expression of their love for each other . i ask those arguing against the bill to think for just a moment about the hurtfulness of what they are doing by saying that . secondly , the bill respects the rights of religious organisations and faiths to opt out , if they wish , of any endorsement of lesbian or gay marriage . i regret that some faith organisations take this view but i would not dream for a moment of imposing on them a requirement to conduct or celebrate something they genuinely believe to be contrary to their faith . however , i beseech them in turn : please do not dare , by voting down this bill , to impose on me the impossibility of celebrating a commitment in the fullest way that society recognises . deny yourselves the obligation by all means , but do not deny me the opportunity .  thirdly , this bill is , at heart , about a simple principle of equality and equal access to the recognition of love and the standing of loving relationships . i was proud to be part of the government who brought in so many changes for the better for lesbians and gay men and eliminated so many discriminations and inequalities . some hurdles remain , however , and this is the highest of them . voting for the bill will right a long-standing wrong . it will recognise the equal dignity and worth of all our lesbian and gay citizens . it will challenge the prejudice that is still all too prevalent in our society . it will say , quite simply , that love matters and equally so for everyone . i urge noble lords to support the bill .  my lords , i begin by expressing my respect for the speakers who have taken different stances on the bill , and particularly for those with whom i disagree . i accept that there are many valid reasons for members of your lordships ' house to put forward objections to the bill , but i am positive that the tide of history is against the objections .  it is rather odd that i am speaking between the speeches of the noble lord , lord cormack , and the right reverend prelate the bishop of chester . nearly 50 years ago , i sat in a room in chester cathedral taking my common entrance exam in order to go to wrekin college , where the noble lord , lord cormack , was a teacher . we are in a different country to that of 1965 . no member of your lordships ' house could then have made the speeches that we have heard today about being gay . when i took that exam , abortion was illegal , capital punishment was on the statute books , homosexual acts in private were matters for criminal law , and there was no race relations legislation whatever . we are in a much better country , and the tide of history is running in only one direction .  the bill represents a great and noble cause - what the noble lord , lord fowler , described as a moral cause . i suggest that , for a non-elected house to object to the bill in this way , particularly after the events of this last weekend , would damage the reputation of this house .  my last point relates to the quadruple lock . i received many letters - as did all noble lords - one of which i have one in my hand . it is from a young christian gay man and it is in ink , so i cannot imagine that he sent it to 850 people , though some other noble lords may have had it . in it he wrote that he was unable to reconcile his christianity with his sexuality , and the fact that the bill was being considered at all was helping him combine those two facets .  st paul wrote to the galatians that in jesus christ there is neither male or female , gentile or jew , slave or free . i do not think that that was a coded message that everybody was okay except gays . it was an inclusive statement . as a member of the anglican world , i hope that one day , before i die , i will see the anglican church unlock that quadruple lock from the inside .  my lords , i support the bill and oppose the amendment , and i congratulate the government on having the courage to come forward with this legislation . i listened carefully to what the noble lord , lord dear , said in moving his amendment and i could not understand his justification for wishing to deny the bill any committee discussion . if there are problems with the bill , surely the obvious place to sort them out is through rigorous examination in committee .  this has been a fascinating debate with some very powerful and emotional contributions . i cannot attempt to engage in a theological debate with the right reverend prelates - i fear that as a non-practising jewish atheist that is probably beyond me . however , treating the matter seriously , as i do , i was interested in the idea that marriage is just one specific type of union between a man and a women and that it is for procreation , if i may paraphrase slightly . i cannot help feeling that the noble lord , lord pannick , was right in saying that the nature of marriage has changed fundamentally since being an institution that discriminated abominably against women , giving them few or no rights whatever when it came to inheritance and even no rights over their children .  i cannot help but reflect that it has changed in relation to my own experience . i have enjoyed marriage so much that i have done it twice - and for the last time , i hope . on the second occasion , my wife wanted our marriage to take place in church and i wanted to respect her views . on that occasion in 1985 , i met the rector and he was a very pleasant individual , but he said , " i 'm really sorry but i cannot marry you in church because you have been divorced " . i now notice that that is no longer the case with the church of england ; it has changed its views . fortunately , we now live in a very different society from the one that existed when marriage was first conceived . the way that society regards homosexual relationships has changed fundamentally , and we have heard some very powerful contributions about that . as i listened to the speech of the noble lord , lord black , i doubted whether anyone in this chamber would have been able to make such a contribution 10 years ago . going back further in time , oscar wilde - a particular favourite of mine - while in jail reflected on the temerity of being forced to admit the nature of his relationship .  i have some sympathy with the right reverend prelates and i would not want the bill to undermine their right to determine who gets married in church . however , they seem to have great difficulty in determining some of their attitudes , whether on homosexuality or on whether a woman should be a bishop . they are still agonising over that with different wings of the church , but their attitudes will no doubt change over time . i think that we have now reached a point in our society where same-sex marriage is right and i do not believe that it will undermine the relationship of marriage . that is the bit of the argument that i do not understand , and i could not put it any better than the noble lord , lord jenkin . i usually find myself in opposition to him but on this occasion - i am sorry that he is not in the chamber - i could not have put it any better than he did .  there has also been a lot of talk about children in marriage . i need to remind people that things are changing all the time . we now have gay couples with children - something that , again , a few years ago we would not have thought of as being a likely occurrence . therefore , i do not believe that this legislation is going to undermine the nature of marriage , although it will not be right for every person . i have a brother who is gay . he has been in a long-term relationship over a number of years and has never expressed to me any desire to change the nature of that relationship . therefore , marriage will not be for every gay couple , but for some it will be and the question is whether we should deny them the opportunity . i do not believe that we should . there are genuine concerns and we should ensure that we have the right to take the bill through its committee stage to examine very carefully whether what has been referred to as the quadruple lock will cover every eventuality . the noble lord , lord pannick , and my noble friend lady kennedy say that they have looked at that very carefully , and i tend - initially , at least - to respect their view , although there may of course be other views . therefore , i support the bill . i am opposed to the amendment and i look forward to committee .  my lords , i rise to support the bill . i want to make three discrete points in this debate , which has had so many speakers and such high running emotion . first , despite many views to the contrary , marriage is in fact a social construct . it was not always one man and one woman . indeed , polygamy was widespread in the ancient world , and its reasons were many . to quote from the hebrew bible , as we call the old testament , solomon was reputed to have a thousand wives . i do not know how he managed . many people will also know the story of jacob and how he got the wrong wife first , with rachel and leah .  i also want to give a bit of history , which your lordships may not know . there was a great rabbi , rabbenu gershom of mainz , who in around 1 ,000 ce , which we call ad , was responsible for what is known as a takkanah , a legal pronouncement which is technically valid for 1 ,000 years . the takkanah of his that concerns us prohibited polygamy . it applied only to ashkenazi jews , those in germany , poland and russia and so on . the sephardi jews - north african , spanish and portuguese - continued to practise polygamy in some areas , and that continued among yemeni jews until the 1950s and 1960s . so for us , marriage was not always just between one man and one woman , nor was it always for the procreation of children . when rabbenu gershom 's takkanah ran out in around 2000 , 13 years ago , you might have expected a wild rush of ashkenazi jewish men seeking second , third and fourth wives , but because marriage is a social construct as much as a legal one , curiously that did not happen , and we would not have wanted it to .  these days we believe in marriage between two people , not more , although serial monogamy is commonplace . marriage has changed dramatically over the millennia and over recent centuries . divorce , which we jews have always accepted , has become widely accepted and no longer a disgrace ; married women now have property rights , although that took its time ; infertility is no longer blamed only on women - it used to be a reason for divorce in judaism after 10 childless years ; and so on . why , then , can we not change this social construct once again , while still maintaining respect for those for whom marriage is about sacrament , but cannot accept such a change ? i think it is important that we do .  secondly , i want to say something about numbers . in my congregation at the west london synagogue - the oldest reform synagogue in the uk - where i am senior rabbi , we have about 3 ,000 members . we also have around 30 gay couples , most - but not all - in civil partnerships now , waiting for the day when they can marry under the chuppah , the wedding canopy , with their parents under that canopy , witnessing them make their vows . for me and my fellow reform and liberal jews , like the unitarians and the quakers , this is about parity of esteem . we see no reason why gay people should not marry as heterosexual people do . we see all human beings as made in the image of god . that means gay and straight . we also believe that human beings are created with the need to seek out and look for a helpmeet in life . that person could be of the same sex , or not . whichever it is , they deserve the right to be able to create a life together permanently and to celebrate it in marriage .  thirdly , as several noble lords have said , this is about righting a wrong . it is about accepting that social conditions and attitudes change and have changed . i hope that noble lords will accept that that is true . we have heard that no court of any kind , domestic or european , would force a religious organisation to perform such marriages against their will . but those of us in religious organisations which are in favour of equal marriage are longing for the day . i expect the first days after it becomes law , as i hope it does , to consist of marriage after marriage in my synagogue , bringing joy , equality and renewed commitment to people who , until this point , have been denied it . it needs to happen soon . it is a moral imperative to right this wrong .  my lords , social change is often contentious and , indeed , even controversial . looking back over the past century , i have been struck by how frequently matters that aroused heated passions when debated faded into consensus once those matters were approved , as i hope this measure will be . in other words , society was ready for the change . perhaps i may give the house a few examples .  the death penalty was abolished in 1969 . in the 1970s , it was a question that lingered on in the conservative party - indeed , conservative party selection committees generally asked a question about it . one of my former colleagues in another place even offered his services as hangman . the sexual offences act 1967 caused enormous controversy at the time . even as recently as the equality act , some church leaders argued for exemptions that would have allowed homosexuals to be turned away from soup kitchens and hospices .  the 1928 equal franchise act gave women equal voting rights with men . at this distance it is a little odd to look back at some of the arguments advanced at the time , in all seriousness , against that measure . i give the house but two examples :  " women have a vast indirect influence through their menfolk " ; and :  " woman suffrage tends to establish competitive relations which will destroy chivalrous considerations " .  i trust that many noble baronesses still experience chivalrous consideration from your lordships but would venture to suggest that this can hardly be put forward as an argument for repeal of the equal franchise act . indeed , i know of no serious organisation today which advocates withdrawing the vote from women , making sexual relationships between people of the same sex a criminal offence or , indeed , restoring the death penalty .  i accept , of course , the sincerity with which some christian organisations oppose this measure . it is right that the bill should not oblige any church to carry out same-sex marriages . however , as we have just heard from the noble baroness , there is not complete agreement on this matter among religious groups . quakers , liberal jews and unitarians support the measure , and my noble friend lord deben , in a characteristically thoughtful article in the tablet , reminded his fellow roman catholics that for over a century it has been accepted that the state has had a role in marriage and that it could and would make its own secular rules for its citizens .  the bill has been a useful vehicle for opening a discussion on humanist marriage . an amendment on the matter was introduced in another place but was withdrawn as the attorney-general advised that , as drafted , it was incompatible with the human rights act . i understand that subsequent discussions have ensued with the british humanist association , and other issues relating , for example , to the definition of premises need to be resolved . i suspect that it would probably add to the challenges before us on this bill to attempt to address those issues now . however , i hope that the minister will assure the house that the dialogue with the british humanists will continue in the hope that this too may be addressed at some point in the future .  finally , some quarters have criticised the prime minister for his personal support of this measure . they say that it is being raised at a time when the country faces huge challenges . frankly , i find it rather refreshing that a prime minister beset , as prime ministers are wont to be , by the great political issues of the day is willing to stand up personally and be counted on a moral issue in which he believes and where there is no obvious political payoff .  i rejoice in the fact that this measure enjoys the support of all three party leaders . i confidently expect that , if it is approved , today 's controversy will rapidly become tomorrow 's consensus .  my lords , as speaker 31 of 94 i am already beginning to feel that most points have been made ; forgive me if i repeat some of them . i am a methodist minister , and i have the privilege of leading many couples through their vows and in a great celebration , in a liturgical way , in church . i believe in marriage . i believe that marriage is the bedrock of our society and brings stability to our communities . i believe that marriage is the best place where children can be nurtured . it is for those reasons that i support this bill . like all of us , i have had many letters and e-mails on the bill . some have suggested that of course i will agree to support traditional marriage based on biblical principles . to one of them i am afraid i replied that i hoped he would start at the beginning of the bible at genesis and try to find one man and one woman in a committed relationship that had been freely chosen . he would have had an awful long read .  there has always been the suggestion that biblical principles have been used on occasion to support the subjugation of women and the primacy of men . these are things that we have had to contend with . when the christian church began to look in its societies and move beyond jerusalem , it had to come to terms with the fact that it was moving into different cultures . there was always the question of whether to challenge the culture or whether to adapt the faith you have received in order to cope with the culture into which you have moved .  today , as many have said , we are moving into a different culture and we cannot rely on the old ways , simply saying that we will remain faithful to what we once knew . equality and freedom , life expectancy , control of reproduction and a deeper understanding of sexual orientation have all affected our understanding of what marriage truly is , as have the negative principles of marital breakdown and broken relationships .  although i would like to do so , i cannot speak on behalf of the methodist church because it is still considering what its response will be if the bill becomes law . however , the methodist church has always based its moral and ethical values on the fourfold foundation of scripture , tradition , reason and experience . twenty years ago , the methodist church committed itself to listening attentively to the experience of those for whom a committed heterosexual relationship would not be possible . i think that we must listen attentively to the experience of today , listen to those for whom a lifelong , loving , faithful , joyful and sacrificial relationship can be achieved only in a same-sex partnership . we also have to listen to the responses that some of us have received from those who bear witness , from childcare and adoption agencies , to the value of same-sex partnerships in the bringing up of children and the overwhelmingly positive signs of good relationships .  we have to listen to the experiences of people and bring to bear our scriptural understanding to the experience which is equally valid under god . the depth and quality of relationships that have already been achieved in civil partnerships shows us that they are almost indistinguishable from the relationships experienced in heterosexual marriage . we have to bear witness to that . but we ask : why is it necessary to change if this is already provided for in our society ? the one thing that is often missing is a deep acceptance that these relationships are equally valid and fruitful , and that they , too , form the bedrock of our society . they help to build up our communities . that is often missing . if it cannot be called marriage , it is seen to be a second-class relationship ; we must address that . i also believe that if this is addressed in society , it may be the encouragement that the churches need in order to move into a different relationship . i long for and look forward to the time when these relationships can be celebrated within our liturgies and in our church life . i hope profoundly that it will become a reality in my lifetime . for all these reasons , i hope that the bill progresses to further discussion and that it is passed .  my lords , i have been moved and very humbled by the intensity of the letters that i have received on this subject , on both sides of the debate . i have huge respect for the conflicting and deeply felt views . i have enjoyed some excellent speeches today . the contributions of those such as the noble lord , lord fowler , are the best possible response to alleged mistakes by some members of this chamber , and to our critics .  i have also been surprised . two of my closest friends , who are gay , are very uncomfortable with the idea of marriage . many more , though , feel deeply insulted that they cannot share in the full rights of partnership that are accorded to heterosexual couples , and that they are somehow treated as second-class citizens . equally , it makes little sense that a man and a woman cannot enter into a civil partnership , but that argument should not derail the express train that is currently racing through parliament - and sometimes we all look forward to the arrival of an express train .  in my recent maiden speech , i mentioned the centenary of my godfather , benjamin britten , lord britten of aldeburgh . when i think of his wonderful relationship with the tenor peter pears and , if i may put it like this , the musical children that resulted from it - works such as " peter grimes " , " billy budd " and the " serenade " - i cannot but recall that theirs was for many years an illegal , criminal relationship , if in every other conceivable way a marvellous and inspiring marriage . mercifully , times have changed .  in the other place , we heard dire warnings that this is only the beginning of homosexual aspiration . to many loving couples it is the beginning of the end - the beginning of the end of an inequality that they feel does not accord their love the same profound dignity as is given to men and women . since many men and women who get married have no intention of creating children , to see marriage as instituted purely for procreation , wonderful though that is , is to take a somewhat narrow and blinkered view of where we now are in our society . this house , and indeed parliament , must now be visionary . in 50 years ' time , probably much less , i suspect that we will look back and see gay marriage as having been as inevitable as the abolition of slavery , the emancipation of women and the decriminalising of homosexual acts between consenting adults .  among your lordships , i would probably be among the last to have a direct line to the thinking of the almighty , but i imagine that the love of human beings for each other would shine out radiantly as a presiding desire - transcending , and regardless of , gender or the semantics and legalese of how those attachments are formulated in contract . finally , having admitted that i do not have a hotline to the almighty , i now feel slightly more that i resemble a parrot because this has been said many times before . however , i must end with it . the vote in the other place was a free vote and that means , if i understand it correctly , that it has a democratic mandate that this house normally feels it must bow before . for that reason , and the others i have mentioned , i will very happily support the bill .  my lords , this is a fine debate and worthy of this house . it is a pleasure to follow the noble lord , lord berkeley , and to have listened to so many fine speeches . like so many others , my postbag has overflowed . most of the letters on paper are against the bill , while the vast majority of those sent by e-mail and twitter are in favour . so there we have it : an older generation versus the new .  the " anti " mail is clearly organised , but there is no harm in that . it does not make the views expressed any less relevant . putting aside those letters that are clearly homophobic and written with green ink in the margin , the overriding message is the appeal to support " the traditional approach to marriage " . as a conservative , i am rather fond of tradition but i must admit that i am at a loss to understand precisely what is meant by " traditional marriage " . how traditional do you want ? as traditional , perhaps , as that well known fan of marriage , henry viii ; or as traditional as the approach that once decreed that marriage had to be for life , no matter the outrages involved ; or the more recent traditional approach that denied a divorced person the privilege of remarrying in a church . there is no traditional approach to marriage . it is an institution that has always changed over time and does not stand frozen in a single moment of morality . it moves ; it adapts .  i would not have introduced this bill at this time . there has been no great public outcry for it , not after the successful introduction of civil partnerships . it seems to me that the differences between a civil partnership and a marriage are so fine as to be almost transparent and cast no great shadow . yet the bill is here - the pebble in the shoe - and it has to be dealt with before we can move on . i know that it was not in any manifesto or in the queen 's speech , which was perhaps a pity , but this issue must be dealt with on its merits and not judged by how it got here .  what should i , as a conservative , feel about gay marriage ? i do not believe in equality - i leave that rather charming nostrum to our friends on the labour benches -  but in equal opportunity . that is getting closer to it . at the heart of this matter is that we are all born unique and different , while at the heart of my conservatism is that no one should be discriminated against because of how they were born . i do not know any man or woman who has found it easy being born gay . i have not met a single one who would have actively chosen that route , with all its discrimination and denigration , and with the embarrassments , injustices and outright hatreds that were and still are put in the way . however , we are what we are - what we have been born - and i will not look a gay man or woman in the eye and say , " you are inferior just because you were born different to me " , any more than i would do that to someone who was black or brown , or a woman or blind . we are surely way beyond that , so despite the fact that i believe that this bill needs more work i will be supporting its principle and doing so as a conservative .  this brings me to my final point , on the amendment of the noble lord , lord dear . i have sincere personal regard for the noble lord but on this issue i differ with him completely . it would do great damage to this place and to the legitimacy of this house if we were to destroy a bill that has been given such an overwhelming majority on a free vote in the house of commons . it would make this unelected house look out of touch , irrelevant and obsolete . it would bring back from the dead all those silly and shallow things that the deputy prime minister keeps muttering about us . our duty in this house is to revise , not to ruin , and to improve rather than oppose to the point of destruction . we have fought so hard in recent months to secure the future of this house and for that reason , above all others , it would be folly to accept this amendment .  my lords , i was anxious to participate in this debate . i will start by telling your lordships what marriage means to me . i was married more than 17 years ago in the beautiful cathedral of st davids in pembrokeshire . i am a committed christian , an active member of the church in wales and the daughter of a much-loved priest who worked his whole life in a deprived parish called ely in cardiff . when i married my gp husband , i did not have the slightest inkling that , to my astonishment and delight , i would become the wife of a clergyman ; my husband will be ordained into the church in wales in just a few weeks ' time .  since then , we have brought two children into the world to respect the faith in which i am immersed . my marriage and family are the most important things in my life , and if they are under threat i will do all i can to protect them . like all parents , we want the very best for our children . we want them to enjoy every possible happiness and hope that one day they will meet their life partner and get married .  when we were married , the words of the service began like this :  " god calls men and women to the married state so that their love may be made holy in lifelong union ; that they may bring up their children to grow in grace and learn to love him ; and that they may honour , help and comfort one another both in prosperity and in adversity " .  we believe that this sacred contract offers the best outcomes for our children and the best place for them to raise their families , and i believe that marriage is the best place for them to do this . i want this for my children , whether they are gay or straight . in speaking for equal marriage , then , let me be clear . i believe equal marriage is in the best interests of my family and of marriage in general . i believe equal marriage is in the best interests of my faith . i believe that equal marriage is in the best interests of my children and everyone else 's children .  some have said that allowing same-sex couples to marry will threaten the institution of marriage and rock the foundations of our society , but i suggest that the opposite is the case . we risk making marriage into a stone idol , rather than a living , life-enhancing experience , by denying it to same-sex couples . with a few exceptions , i have been deeply disappointed by the contributions to the debate from the leaders of my faith . they seem to dwell on the concept of the institution of marriage . institutions are often dark , dull , dusty places and none can survive without being revisited and refreshed ; maybe your lordships ' house is an example of that .  i look back at the words of the preface to the welsh marriage service , where it says :  " god calls men and women to the married state " .  marriage is a vocation , a response to a divine call rather than a set of dusty , ancient rules . for those who celebrate their christian faith , marriage is far more than a legal contract . marriage is a response to god 's call to love , and i see no reason why that should be limited to being between women and men . i believe the preface of the welsh marriage service teaches correctly . god calls men and women to the married state , and that call , if it is between two men or two women , is equally sacred , is equally a marriage and deserves to be recognised in law .  i share with the most reverend primate the archbishop of canterbury his experience of gay families when he says :  " you see gay relationships that are just stunning in the quality of the relationship " .  however , the failure of his and my church to recognise the vocation of these " stunning " couples as marriage is deeply troubling to many faithful anglicans here in the united kingdom . the response of the church to this issue reminds us of a shameful time , only recently passed , when women with stunning vocations to the priesthood were told they could not have this vocation .  i share with many in this house and in the house of commons a growing sadness at the discrimination that the church continues to practise because of the exemptions it has secured from law . it is becoming increasingly disturbing for me to think that my faith cannot survive in our society without the need for special protection , and has become the last bastion of social conservatism . i am pleased to see that there is a correction to the original bill that recognises the church in wales as a disestablished church . there is now a provision which allows the governing body of the church in wales to introduce same-sex marriage if it should wish . i hope that the more progressive forces within the church in wales will win this argument and that wales will lead the way for the anglican church in england .  my gay friends are not beating down my door demanding that we recognise their " stunning " relationships as marriage . it is people like me - mothers , sisters , friends - who look at their relationships and recognise the vocation of marriage when we see it , and are demanding that we should recognise and celebrate their calling and not try to hide it in some dark corner by calling it something else .  this bill has passed all its stages elsewhere . it is the will of the people that same-sex couples should have their marriage relationships recognised in law . surveys have shown that 80% of adults of my generation or younger now support same-sex legislation , including three in five people like me , who have faith . i am deeply saddened by the thought that if my children grow up to love someone of the same gender they cannot have their love affirmed and celebrated by the church to which they belong .  my lords , to my mind , the evidence is quite clear . marriage is a human construct and the romantic idea of marriage as a beacon of stability does not stand up to scrutiny . rather , as views about what is socially acceptable have changed , so have the boundaries and parameters of marriage .  the freedom to marry in the united kingdom used to be confined to anglicans . over the centuries , it has been extended to catholics , jews and quakers , to all other religions , and to those of no religion at all . divorce no longer requires an act of parliament and women now have equal status in a marriage .  more than 80% of people in britain now agree that homosexuality is a way of life that should be accepted by society . what should be , and always has been , the yardstick when it comes to marriage is what is socially desirable ; we should then decide what the function of marriage should be - not the other way round . that is one of the many reasons why i support this bill . i want to offer two more .  the first is a practical argument , based on my long time in business . in 2007 , i resigned as ceo of bp because of the lengths i went to in order to hide my sexuality . i thought that coming out might threaten the company 's commercial relationships and my career . i will never know if those fears were justified , but they are no way to do business . people are happier , more productive and make more money for their company when they feel included and they can be themselves . as a business leader , i want people to focus all their energies on their job , not on hiding part of who they are . inclusiveness makes good business sense and giving gay couples the freedom to marry will eliminate one more barrier to inclusion . if it helps them to be themselves in the workplace , it will represent another step towards the meritocracy to which we all aspire . gay marriage is a matter of strategic importance for british business .  the second reason comes from my personal experience . i grew up in a climate of fear , where homosexuality was illegal . my mother was an auschwitz survivor and advised me never to trust anyone with my secrets . i avoided discrimination by simply keeping quiet . young gay people today live in a different , more tolerant world but they still worry about discrimination , marginalisation and how their families and friends will react . one of the most effective ways to dispel this stigma is through the provision of role models . if i had seen gay men in legally recognised public relationships of the sort my parents were in , i would have found it easier to come out and i would have been a much happier person .  we must not lose the plot . the bill enables same-sex couples to be married by civil and - only if they provide their consent - religious authorities . at critical points in history , this house has recognised the need to adapt to changes in society . that is the source of its strength and the reason for its longevity . i intend to vote against the noble lord 's amendment .  my lords , it seems to me that one of the difficulties we have when faced with something that appears to be so new is that we cannot quite imagine what it must have been like when something like this happened in the past . however , there is a direct 19th century parallel to the debate we are having here . it was the argument about the right of a man to marry his deceased wife 's sister . that battle was horrendous . the table of kindred and affinity , that schoolboy refuge from boring sermons , specifically forbids such a union . it is the same chapter of leviticus that condemns gay sex , and it called marriage with your dead wife 's sister an abomination . on that basis , your lordships ' house stopped reform from 1835 right up to 1907 . last week , i reread the arguments of those who scuppered the reform , and i fear that i have heard them all again today . your lordships then complained about rushed legislation . they said that it would be the end of marriage and that it would encourage incest . they hinted at polygamy . they said in particular that for 2 ,000 years such an outrageous thing had never been contemplated , and yet , once passed , that most controversial of acts was wholly accepted . the church of england revised the table of kindred and affinity so that what was once an abomination is now holy matrimony .  it was the science that did it . once we understood consanguinity , we distinguished between relationships that were genetically dangerous and those which were simply culturally arguable , and so it is with gay marriage . once we understand scientifically that some people are solely attracted to their own sex , we realise that homosexual practice is not heterosexuals behaving badly , but gay people behaving naturally . that automatically means that the state can no longer exclude this minority . as a result , in my lifetime we have moved from criminalisation almost to equality . today , we have the chance to complete that journey , to accept the science , and to allow civil marriage for all .  this is civil marriage . state marriage has diverged from church teaching for more than 150 years ; some would even say since henry viii rigged the rules to his own advantage , but that would be an embarrassment to some members of this noble house . as a convert catholic , i have chosen to accept that christian marriage is about procreation , that it is indissoluble , and that there is no such thing as divorce . yet , as a parliamentarian , i cannot demand that non-catholics should accept that definition . as the noble and right reverend lord , lord carey , has reminded us on other occasions , marriage is owned neither by church nor state . otherwise , i have to say to the noble and right reverend lord that i am worried about the basis of his theology . it seems to be stuck in an earlier age . there are no echoes of rené girard , one of the greatest theologians of our time . there is no word from dom sebastian moore , not a touch of james alison . it remains a theology that has not come to terms with freud . in that it is a precise parallel with the 19th-century bishops who spoke here in that debate and who like samuel wilberforce had a theology that could not admit of darwin .  there are , of course , those who say , " why can 't these homosexuals make do with civil partnerships ? " that is entirely to miss the point . civil partnership is a means of protecting legal rights . marriage is a public affirmation of love . the noble and right reverend lord , lord carey , says that marriage is at the heart of love . he is saying that this house should say to homosexuals that they may not express their love in that way . married for 37 years , i find that offensive . as a parliamentarian , i cannot say that to fellow citizens . i cannot accept a society that will not go that far .  lord carey of clifton : i wonder whether the noble lord would allow me to say that my argument was built on a very unsatisfactory bill . we need to send it back to the country so that we can have a proper debate on it . the noble lord talks about the changes to marriage . of course there have been many changes , but there has not been a change to the fundamental fact about male and female . i think that all the theologians , stretching back , would agree with me .  lord deben : all i would say to the noble and right reverend lord is that he is asking for us to go back to have a debate that he has already concluded . he has said that it cannot change this basic fact . i am suggesting that we have to accept that major social changes do not happen when the majority have aligned themselves . major social changes have almost always happened when a minority have stood up for what they believe to be right and put it to the public , and in the end have proved that they are right .  i suggest that many of those who talk about civil partnerships were not terribly notable for their support of them at the time . i voted against civil partnerships because i thought that they were a fraud . the government told gay people that it was marriage and straight people that it was not . i can now , in good conscience , vote for a truthful statement of a necessary reform and for a prime minister brave enough to promote it . i hope that this house will not repeat its 19th-century error . i hope that understanding will break through our misgivings and christian charity through our doubts , and that the house will have the strength to say yes to this bill .  my lords , this bill is about human rights and , as one citizen wrote to me , the creation of a society ,  " where citizens are equal both in rights and responsibilities " .  in other words , this means equal citizenship for lesbian , gay and transgender couples . in the words of an lgbt carer , cited by barnado 's , which supports this bill in the interests of children , despite the fears expressed by a number of noble lords ,  " this is an opportunity to take away yet another barrier to equality , removing something that makes our families different to straight families " .  i would like to cite and pay tribute to a colleague of mine at loughborough university , who has been at the forefront of the battle for equal marriage , professor sue wilkinson , and to her partner , a former colleague of mine , professor celia kitzinger . they married in canada when professor wilkinson was based there , only for their marriage to be automatically deemed a civil partnership in this country when she returned . that for them was not equality . the noble lord , lord deben , has explained extremely well why it was not equivalent . they wrote :  " as long as marriage is open only to heterosexuals , and civil partnerships only to lesbians and gay men , the british government is maintaining a symbolic separation of straights and gays , and sending out the clear message that our relationships are of less value to society than heterosexual ones . this is insulting , demeaning and profoundly discriminatory : an affront to social justice and human rights " .  i thus congratulate the government on legislating to remove this affront .  in doing so , however , the government risk creating a new source of injustice : the denial of the right of access to civil partnerships for same-sex couples . the announcement of an early review of civil partnerships is therefore welcome . i very much hope that that review will lead to their extension to same-sex couples , not their abolition . the government equalities office published a document challenging some of the myths around the bill . it states :  " myth : there is no difference between civil partnership and marriage . reality : there are some small legal differences ... but for many people there are important differences in the perception of and responsibilities associated with these separate institutions " .  in the interests of those same-sex and opposite-sex couples alike for whom these differences matter , it would be a backwards step to do away with civil partnerships .  when the joint committee on human rights , of which i am a member , questioned ministers , the secretary of state had some trouble in understanding why some straight couples might prefer a civil partnership over marriage . the noble lord , lord faulks , who is not in his place , explained :  " there are a number of people , particularly women , who do not perhaps share your enthusiasm for marriage and think that marriage oppresses women . none the less , they would like the benefits of a civil partnership and find it rather peculiar that they would not be able to have the benefit of this relationship when same-sex couples can " .  i have to confess that i was one of those women who chose not to enter what i saw as a patriarchal institution , even if the likes of george clooney were available , which of course he was not . however , i might well have welcomed the possibility of a civil partnership - particularly with mr clooney . the committee also questioned ministers about the costs argument that they had advanced . the minister for pensions cited a figure of £3 billion to £4 billion , but later indicated that this figure referred to the cost of total equality in public service pension schemes . of course , the bill does not end discrimination in pension schemes , an issue that was raised in the commons . could the minister now provide a more accurate and focused estimate of the cost of extending civil partnerships to opposite-sex couples ?  in the time available , it has not been possible to go into the bill 's details or raise issues such as the legal recognition of humanist weddings , which i would support in principle . to finish where i began , i believe that this bill represents an important step for human rights and equal citizenship . i therefore hope that your lordships ' house will support its basic principles when we come to vote tomorrow .  my lords , seven years ago , this house considered the late lord joffe 's bill on assisted dying for the terminally ill . i had been here only a couple of years and found it quite hard to make up my mind . i could see that the key was whether the safeguards were sufficient or whether , in the urge to be copper-bottomed , they had become too complex . i looked forward to second reading , because i expected the arguments for and against , and the merits and inadequacies of the various safeguards to be brought out fully . i was shocked when this house refused a second reading . it seemed to me that we had refused to do our job . that is how i feel about the amendment of the noble lord , lord dear , as he knows ; he was kind enough to tell me in advance of his intent , and i told him that i could not support it .  as this debate has very eloquently shown , the bill arouses strong feelings on all sides of this house , as did the assisted dying bill . i believe that there is a majority in this country in favour of this bill , though a much smaller majority than was in favour of the assisted dying bill . i believe that on assisted dying , the majority is now greater than it then was . i hope that when the noble and learned lord , lord falconer , presents his bill , we will not make the mistake we made seven years ago .  however , there is a big difference between the two bills . this is a government bill that has passed through the house of commons . in his eloquent speech , the noble lord , lord dear , made four arguments to support his thesis that the procedures so far have been undemocratic . first , he said that the bill had been in nobody 's manifesto and was not in the coalition agreement . what new doctrine is this ? would we have abolished capital punishment if it had been a requirement that it should first be in somebody 's manifesto ? would lord jenkins , in his remarkable tenure at the home office , have introduced the society-changing reforms - wholly to the benefit of society , in my view - if they had first to be in the labour manifesto ? they were not in the labour party 's manifesto . i do not think absence of a reference in a manifesto proves that this is undemocratic and i would be surprised if students of burke were to think that . secondly , the noble lord , lord dear , argued that the public bill committee was skewed in its membership and that its discussions were curtailed . possibly - i do not know - but it seems a very odd reaction to such a criticism to say that we should be denied any committee stage . if the committee stage was too short in the commons , let us put that right in this place . thirdly , he argued that the public consultation was inadequate or in some way defective . i do not know about that but let us explore that in our detailed discussions on this bill . fourthly , he said that members of parliament were under pressure from the party hierarchies and therefore it was not truly a free vote , to which i can say only that members of parliament , like members of this house , are grown-ups . they make up their own minds .  let us remember that in the other place they face the electorate back in their constituencies and if they are thought to have got it wrong they may pay for that and realising that may affect how they vote . it comes pretty oddly from this place , where we are not exactly paragons of democratic accountability , to accuse the other place of an undemocratic procedure in this case . i very much hope that the noble lord , lord dear , will withdraw his amendment or , if he does not , that the house will not support it .  my lords , to be given one of the dog watch slots - number 57 - in a debate in this house is usually some form of whip 's punishment . however , tonight it has been a privilege and a pleasure to listen to superb speeches from all sides of the house and on both sides of the debate , and to arguments that cross parties , religion , and sometimes confound pre-held expectations of allegiance . i suspect the reason for that unpredictability is that every one of us in this house has formed a very personal view of both marriage and homosexuality , forged sometimes by religious beliefs or by upbringing , but certainly by our own personal experiences .  we have lived through some quite extraordinary times . the way our society treats homosexual people has changed dramatically in the course of one generation , from being a crime to be punished with hard labour in prison ; through discrimination , social ostracism , victimisation and , most recently , ridicule ; to a point today where - i think the noble earl , lord shrewsbury , put his finger on it - to the next generation homosexuals are not branded as " queers " but are seen as people who simply have one natural variant of the human condition . it is not surprising that many of those who have lived through such rapid change are a little " off the pace " , as they say in horse racing . bringing up the rear at present , i am sorry to say , is the church of england . attitudes to marriage , too , have changed rapidly , and not always with consequences for the worst . like it or not , today many people choose to live together and have children without it . yet when did we last hear a child described as " illegitimate " , as always used to be the case in my mother 's generation ? that must be a good thing . like other noble lords , i have had many e-mails urging me not to support this bill , as it will change or even destroy marriage as we know it . however , it has changed and is changing , even in the church of england . indeed , it has to change to meet the needs of a changing society or it will simply become an irrelevance to more and more people .  surely what is important is that our society is strengthened by more stable and loving relationships and the children brought up in them , who have the best start in life . almost every relationship , unless you are incredibly fortunate , will hit choppy water or even the odd rock at some point . marriage provides the strongest glue there is to hold two people together when that happens . surely those couples who care enough to want to marry should be allowed to do so whatever their sex . why should they not be permitted to use the strongest glue there is - the superglue - rather than being told to make do with the paste and water of a civil partnership ? as the noble and right reverend lord , lord harries of pentregarth , said , marriage is in effect regarded as the gold standard and at the moment we deny it to a section of our people .  to those who say that it was not properly scrutinised in the other place , my answer is : so what is new ? if we rejected every bill in that category almost no legislation would pass through this house . it will get proper scrutiny here . if there are concerns , for example , about people who may lose their jobs , they will be explored and , i hope , corrected if that worry is correct . some of the letters i have had say that it is not fair on the children . i seem to remember the same argument was once applied to mixed-race marriages and to catholics marrying protestants and jews marrying outside their faith - but no longer . the next generation has adapted to change and to variations on the traditional two married parents of opposite sex model .  i have had people say in letters , e-mails and , indeed , in this house that homosexuals cannot consummate a marriage ; marriage is meant for the creation of children ; homosexuals cannot commit adultery . those are the strains of objections voiced by a number of your lordships , including the noble lord , lord tebbit . we do not stop women over childbearing age or some disabled people from marrying , or those who cannot have or do not want children - of course not . as the right reverend prelate the bishop of leicester conceded , such people are no less married - so why not homosexuals ?  it is said that there is no demand for the bill . it is true that its provisions will affect a relatively small number of our total population , but it corrects an unfairness for those people and rights a wrong that has gone on for too long . frankly , whether it is two or 2 million who are involved , it matters not if it is the right thing to do . i believe that this bill reflects a change in social attitudes whose time has come . i pay tribute to our much criticised prime minister , who has stuck to his guns on the bill when it must have been very politically difficult for him . i am particularly sorry to have to oppose the noble lord , lord dear , who has led us to some famous victories in the house . i regret that on this one , i believe that he is wrong .  nobody is going to be forced by the bill to contract , conduct or argue the case for a same-sex marriage . if an invitation should come through the door , any of your lordships is free to reply , " thank you but no thank you " . it is time to give homosexuals the same choices as heterosexuals and the same benefits in relation to civil marriage . it is time for us to stop putting them in a separate category and tolerating them . they deserve equality because they are equal . in five years ' time , i believe we will look back on this debate with incredulity at the objections that were raised and regard the time when homosexuals were not permitted to marry in the same way as today we view that long-gone time when - no doubt well meaning - teachers used a ruler to slap the left wrist of the left-handed child learning to write .  as many noble lords have pointed out , the marriage bill is highly emotive and induces strong feelings . i make no attempt to synthesize the varying views of this house ; i rise to make one simple point . by voting in favour of the bill we would be gaining something while losing nothing . that is to say , it would be a net gain .  what would we be losing ? i urge noble lords to consider , for a moment , the proposition that some who oppose the bill have put forward . they say that the institution of marriage would be undermined . they say that by allowing two gay people to marry marriage would somehow no longer be sacrosanct . they infer that their marriage would no longer mean what it once did . i ask noble lords to consider how their marriage would be undermined , subverted or devalued simply by allowing two members of the same sex the privilege that they themselves enjoy . i have come to the conclusion that my marriage would be just as special the day before this bill is passed as it would be on the day after it was passed . i suggest that as i was married in the eyes of the lord , i would remain thus . to reiterate the point , those of us married in traditional marriages would not lose anything at all .  i would like to consider what the country would gain by passing the bill . as a conservative , i believe passionately in the institution of marriage . would we not want to encourage as many people as possible to enter into such a stable institution ? bruce anderson , on conservative home , describes the family as " social penicillin " and an establishment that can ,  " cure so many social diseases " .  in a crude comparison of married people and their single counterparts , we can see lower levels of disease , morbidity and mortality , healthier lifestyle choices and lower levels of crime and anti-social behaviour . the more people who seek to take this social penicillin , straight or gay , the better . put simply , gay people would gain something that was previously denied them , and society would lose nothing .  i will conclude on a point made by my friend daniel hannan . he reminds us of the issues that have come before this house over the past 20 years : section 28 , lowering the age of consent , gay adoption and civil partnerships , among others . these issues , bitterly opposed by some at the time , have become widely accepted today . at those difficult moments , we as a house recognised the need for change . we accepted that our understandings of tradition no longer resonated with the modern world . we therefore voted to change those understandings to better reflect the generations growing up beneath us . as we did so , the new settlement became the new tradition . that is to say , the necessities of one generation became the traditions of the next .  it is right that we pay particular attention to what is being said outside this chamber . we should listen especially to the young , the next generation . we should listen to their opinions and views about same-sex marriage . the young support the bill in overwhelming numbers . i urge noble lords to bear this in mind in the division lobbies tomorrow and allow the next generation not to reject the traditions of yesteryear but to build the traditions of the future . in doing so , we would be voting to allow the gay community - here i echo the prime minister - to walk that little bit taller in the world .  my lords , i support noble lords who have spoken in favour of the bill , but i wish to speak about the small section of it that affects trans people , which has not been covered sufficiently this evening . i should declare an interest as chair of the parliamentary group on transgender issues .  transgender people suffer not homophobia but transphobia , which in many ways is more insidious and difficult to deal with than homophobia . i will give a devastating example : the case of lucy meadows , a trans primary school teacher who committed suicide after being pilloried and told by some of the parents and the press in particular that because she had transed she was not fit to be a teacher . the coroner told the gathered reporters , " and to you the press , i say , ' shame , shame on all of you ' " . he was absolutely right .  however , that is only one example of the discrimination that many trans people experience because of the fear of supposed difference and the bigotry expressed against a person who should be recognised and treated respectfully and equally . two aspects of the bill correct some of the current anomalies and accept that recognition . it is welcome that the legislation provides for married trans people who wish to apply for gender recognition . it removes the requirement for them to be single at the point of gender recognition and thereby removes the obligation to dissolve their existing marriage or civil partnership . equally welcome is the government 's concession on spouse 's survivor pensions , which will ensure that no ongoing financial penalty will be incurred should a trans person in an existing marriage gain gender recognition .  there are , however , other fundamental issues that continue to present major concerns for trans people in existing marriages . schedule 5 to the bill is designed to amend the gender recognition act 2004 , so that the requirement for an applicant to have dissolved any existing marriage is removed . the effect is that that the trans person 's spouse must grant consent for the trans person 's gender recognition . if that spouse refuses to give that consent or cannot be contacted , the trans person cannot gain gender recognition without ending the marriage . that seems unfair and surely a discrimination that has to be removed . it has been said that that is not a veto . one might not use that word but , to me , it is a way of saying no . i am not quite sure what the difference between " veto " and " no " is . it has also been said that it only happens very rarely , but if it only happens to one person , it is wrong .  many events can fundamentally alter a marriage , including domestic arrangements such as buying a new home , having children , applying for distant jobs or medical issues . none of these requires formal spousal consent before they can commence . the government argue that it would be unfair to remove the right of every non-trans spouse to have a say in the future of their marriage before gender recognition takes place . however , as mike freer , a conservative mp , said in the commons ,  " it is bizarre that a man or woman who is transitioning can have surgery and change their name but cannot have a gender realignment certificate without spousal approval " . - [  official report   , commons , 21/5/13 ; col . 1127 .]  a bill designed to allow same-sex marriages and to treat them in the same way as other marriages is , in these cases , maintaining a difference between opposite-sex and same-sex marriages . this anomaly will , i am sure , be discussed in more detail in committee .  another anomaly which we should discuss further relates to section 12(h) of the matrimonial causes act 1973 , which allows for the annulment of a marriage if someone discovers that their spouse has a gender recognition certificate but did not tell them beforehand . the response to the suggestion that this should be removed is , " get out of the marriage quickly and at low cost " . unfortunately , it is not that simple . the courts would have to rely on one person 's word against another 's and , as the section applies only to those who already have a gender recognition certificate , the outcome could be that someone could decide not to apply for one , with the consequences that follow from not doing so . these are two anomalies which we need to sort out when we come to committee .  overall , however , allowing same-sex couples to marry will remove yet another distinction between lesbian , gay , bisexual and transgender people and those who are straight . this will reduce stigma and take another step forward on the road towards lgbt people receiving their full rights . i am proud that i have been able to play some part in this in the past and i shall certainly vote for the bill .        my lords , it is a privilege to start our second day of debate on this important bill . yesterday our debate was a wonderful demonstration of this house 's ability to tackle difficult issues with restraint and respect , and i hope that we may continue in that vein today . there are three main reasons why i support the bill . first , i support it because i am a firm believer in marriage . enduring relationships between couples , based on love , respect and responsibility , are good for the people involved and , in turn , strong relationships are good for society . couples who want to share their lives together do not have to get married , and the bill will not change that , but many value the sustainability and stability that marriage offers . i believe that marriage is a great environment in which to raise children but , for all kinds of reasons , marriage today is not defined by children or even by the possibility of procreation . marriage is a much bigger concept than that . being gay or lesbian is not a lifestyle choice but an essential fact about a small but significant minority . it is as natural for them to seek lifetime relationships with a person of the same sex as it is for most of us to share our lives with an opposite sex partner . as a happily married woman , i will gladly extend marriage to committed couples who happen to be of the same sex . i genuinely find it difficult to work out why other happily married people want to deny them the privilege of marriage , and i certainly reject the suggestion made yesterday that same sex couples should invent their own name in place of marriage . my second reason is that same sex marriage has popular support . the house of commons library note on the bill makes it clear that polls can be skewed by the questions asked , but the clear evidence from the various polls that have asked straightforward questions about same sex marriage is that there is a majority , and an increasing one , in favour . the most important feature is that support is huge in the younger age groups , and only those over 65 show net opposition . i hope that noble lords will reflect today that same sex marriage will have its greatest impact on age groups that are barely represented in your lordships ' house . freedom is my third reason for supporting this bill . we have to ask very serious questions about why the law should deny people the freedom to do things that they want to do . of course , there are strong public policy grounds for stopping people from doing all sorts of things , but i struggle to see what public policy grounds should prevent same sex couples from being married . if we embrace the freedom to marry in the bill , it will surely bring happiness to a minority . i have heard nothing in the debate thus far that points to clear and specific harm to other groups in society . i could have seen a public policy reason for objecting to the bill if it rode roughshod over the ability of the established religions to maintain their own concepts of marriage , but the quadruple lock arrangements in the bill seem to me - and to the church of england , if i read its announcement last month correctly - to provide robust protections for religious freedoms . marriage is a great institution that belongs to society as a whole , not to particular groups . parliament is the right place to guard access to marriage . we have the privilege of a free vote and we must use it with wisdom , for the benefit of society , regardless of our personal preferences . if the noble lord , lord dear , decides to divide the house , i hope that we will respect the clear decision of the other place on a free vote . we can then move on to the job that we are good at , as a revising chamber , testing all the detailed concerns that have rightly been raised by noble lords in this debate .  my lords , gay men and women have waited for far too long to have the same rights as straight married couples - the right to say , " not tonight dear , i have a headache " , or , " you don 't look fat in that dress " , the right to tell all those wonderful mother-in-law jokes , and even , in the case of the noble baroness on the government front bench , the right to marry george clooney . before i move to the substance of my speech , i want to pay tribute to two prime ministers . i start with my right honourable friend tony blair . it is his unstinting commitment to equality , taking us from the unequal age of consent through same sex couple adoptions , the repeal of section 28 and civil partnerships , that has made it possible for us to be here today . i also want to pay tribute to the prime minister . change requires personal courage and , on this issue , there can be no doubt that david cameron has shown a huge amount of that . i also pay tribute to the others in the conservative party who have joined us on these and the liberal democrat benches in our fight for equality . the vote in the other place was a source of real pride - to see so many mps , and particularly so many conservative mps , add their voices to ours in a free vote - and i hope that we will see the same again today . the bill is not about the right of one group against the rights of another . it is about love . it is about who we love and about how we express that love between one another . marriage is not a contract based on property . it does not belong to one group of people or one group of religious organisations . it is not a contract that is based on financial advantage or disadvantage . it is a contract of love and commitment . some of those who have opposed this bill have spoken passionately on the basis of deeply held religious views . i am sincerely glad that the government have listened to their concerns and put watertight protections into the bill . however , the bill is equally designed to allow those religious organisations that want to marry same sex couples to do so : the quakers , the liberal jews , the unitarian church . many to whom i have spoken in the church of england have argued that allowing same sex couples to marry would risk the breakdown of the anglican communion - the african churches would pull away . last week in nigeria , a law was passed prohibiting gay marriage and banning gay organisations with a 14-year prison sentence for anyone who advocates gay marriage - that is , people like me making arguments like these . the church should not be opposing same-sex marriage because of the african churches ; the church should be supporting it because of african churches . i want them to show the same leadership that they have shown on issues such as tackling debt and poverty . that is a fight well worth fighting . if the most reverend primate the archbishop of canterbury and others on the benches spiritual support civil partnerships , then i , like many gay people , wait with bated breath for the liturgy to allow civil partnerships to be blessed in churches . they have talked the talk ; it is now time to walk the walk . there are also those who say , " we don 't understand why you want marriage . civil partnership is different but equal " . it is an understandable question . however , it is an emotional response . to find the answer , they need only to have listened to those powerful speeches of their noble friends on their own benches : the noble baroness , lady barker , and the noble lords , lord black of brentwood , lord smith of finsbury and lord browne of madingley , yesterday . different , in this context , is not equal . different is different and equal is equal . there are also those who oppose the bill because they just do not want change . they have by and large opposed every change in equality over the past 15 years . they are the people who campaigned for section 28 , and i heard echoes of it again last night as they spun the lie that teachers will be made to promote gay marriage . they are the people who campaigned against same sex couple adoptions , regardless of the interest of the child . they are the people who campaigned against civil partnership but find no problem with it now . for them , no argument will suffice . that brings me neatly to the amendment of the noble lord , lord dear . i am sure there are many like me who believe that this amendment is wrong in principle . it does not uphold the best traditions of this house in spirit or in the manner in which it has been managed . however , the noble lord has put his amendment down , so vote we must . i hope that today we will demonstrate to those who seek to wreck the bill that they will fail . i ask noble lords to vote for the bill because everyone deserves the right to have their love recognised equally by the state and because religious organisations should have the right to marry same sex couples , but not the obligation to do so . i hope that noble lords vote against the amendment because it is the right and decent thing to do .  my lords , in some very fine speeches yesterday we heard every legal , theological , ethical and procedural issue set out very cogently . i noted that in the very last speech at the end of yesterday 's proceedings my noble friend lord flight said : " if there is one single point on which i think this bill should not proceed , it is that the nation is absolutely divided " . - [official report , 3/6/13 ; col . 1046 .] hearing that comment prompted me to remind myself at once that my noble friend lord flight really is the noted author of an irresistible page-turner entitled all you need to know about exchange rates . if in that context one always had to wait for consensus , we would surely be in a far worse position economically than we are now . i say to my noble friend and to others that parliament has a duty to lead , as well as to follow . the way in which i hope to enforce this debate is by evidence rather than by advocacy . among the five challenging and always interesting daughters that my wife and i have between us , my oldest daughter is a 40 year-old respected academic with two fine children . she is engaged - to be married , they hope - to another professional woman with one child . past relationships - including , in my daughter 's case , heterosexual relationships - have proved unsuccessful and unenduring for them both . now , we have two articulate and clever women who at least have found constant love , and emotional and every fulfilment , in each other . we as a family respect their wishes . their wish is to be married and they will brook no other term for their intention . they believe and articulate that it is discriminatory and demeaning that their intended marriage should receive any less legal recognition than any other marriage in the country - indeed , in the world , as they would say . by their relationship , they have brought new stability and certainty for their children , all of whom want them to be married and wish to take a full part in their wedding . i agree with them when they ask what conceivable damage their marriage , if permitted , would do to any other marriage in the land . is there any one of your married lordships who would feel any less married if anna and joanna were permitted lawful wedlock ? among the many objections that we have heard , we have heard a good deal about pressure on ministers of religion . that has been answered comprehensively , but quite apart from the answers that have already been given , including the quadruple lock , and the detailed answer on the law given by the noble lord , lord pannick , and the noble baroness , lady kennedy , do your lordships really think that any gay couple would want to be married by a priest or other official of any kind who was opposed to single-sex marriage ? of course they would not . therefore , to opponents of the bill , i suggest that this is far from the end of marriage as we know it . indeed , it may be the reinvigoration of marriage in a way that we do not yet know . the bill offers the prospect of strong new examples of marriage , such as my daughters , and an increase in family stability , which these additional marriages would bring .  my lords , my upbringing was in the intense , enclosed environment of post-war liverpool catholicism . until i went to university and until i was first exposed to the tentative calls for the decriminalisation of homosexuality , i had not the slightest idea what it was . i knew that oscar wilde had been imprisoned , but for what exactly was a mystery . i was not alone . in the 1960s , on the first television programme that i ever produced , i worked with kenny everett - a supremely talented iconoclast , who was the programme 's main presenter . kenny was only two weeks younger than me . he had lived on merseyside but a mile away , although i had not known him , and he went to another catholic school just down the road from mine . in his teens , kenny appreciated that he was different . he would tell me that he had experienced stirrings in the presence of handsome young men , but these feelings were unfathomable to him . it was not until later when he worked in london in his early 20s , and not until after he had indeed married , that he came finally to understand and slowly to embrace his true nature - the one with which he had been born . in the decades that followed i worked in broadcasting with many other people who were gay but who would not admit it . i recall vividly that in the 1980s a close and esteemed colleague came with tears in his eyes to tell me both that he was gay and that he was about to die of aids , which , tragically , he shortly did . even in the 1990s , friends and colleagues who were clearly gay were unwilling to acknowledge it , especially in public . yet social and cultural attitudes have changed rapidly . one of the most profound and progressive changes i have witnessed in my lifetime is how many men and women are now unabashed about their homosexuality , and feel free to present their partners with pride and confidence . openly gay couples are now commonplace in almost every section of society and almost every walk of life . the introduction of civil partnerships was a vital step , allowing gay couples to enjoy the legal privileges afforded to heterosexual marriage . this bill goes the whole hog and rightly allows gay couples who wish to do so to match opposite-sex couples , and make the powerful public statement of love and commitment that marriage proclaims . on the question that so basically divides the two sides in this debate , i feel not a scintilla of hesitation or doubt . if gay couples want that option - that unequivocal equality with heterosexual partnerships - then they should have it . of course same-sex marriage will not eliminate prejudice or discrimination , but it will certainly hasten the day when homosexuality is accepted as a wholly natural state . two parts of the bill cause me sadness . along with everybody else who has spoken , i accept the need for religious freedom . i accept it and i respect it . i recall the persecution of catholics in this country . however , i do not have to admire the fruits of that freedom . the perspective of the other side of the argument is that the bill entrenches and legitimises the discrimination that still exists in the established churches . the notion that a gay in a civil partnership may only be a bishop in the anglican church if he is celibate , for instance , i find both astonishing and repugnant . yet over the past two days we have heard that there is already some diversity of opinion within the established church on the matter of gay marriage . i do not expect to see it in my lifetime , but the day will come when age-old discrimination within the churches against both women and gays - born of ancient attitudes , in different societies and in older times - will simply wither away . the inherent values of tolerance and respect , reflected in christ 's essential teaching , will one day prevail . my second sadness is that the bill narrowly missed an opportunity to follow canada , australia , new zealand and ireland and allow the growing ethical but non-religious movement to which i proudly belong , the humanists , to conduct legal marriage ceremonies . that is a regret and a missed opportunity . however , i recognise that this brave bill brings us one historic step closer to a better world , and i wholeheartedly support it .  my lords , i already had doubts about what i would be able to add at this stage of the debate and they have not been at all allayed by the quality of the fine speeches we have already heard today , including a characteristically telling one from the noble and learned lord , lord mackay of clashfern . i shall just offer a few thoughts based on my personal experience of marriage . marriage matters immensely to me . my own marriage has been one of the most important and fulfilling aspects of my life , probably the most . it has brought me companionship , support , shared experience , enjoyment and many other benefits , including the pleasures of children and grandchildren , over more than 40 years . i do not suppose that there are many long-married couples who would say that their marriage had all been plain sailing , and i certainly would not make such a claim . but my wife and i made a commitment , to ourselves and to each other , in front of our assembled friends and family : a public expression of our desire and determination to make our marriage work for the long term . that commitment , both private and public , has given our relationship much greater strength to withstand the varied challenges that we have faced . we in the uk have come a long way over the years in recognising and accepting those within our society whose preferences in love are for members of their own sex . many of them form stable , long-term , deeply loving relationships , sometimes including children . so why should they too not enjoy the full benefits of marriage , with the added commitment that it implies , with equal recognition of their status by the state and society and with that extra resilience in their relationship that my wife and i have enjoyed ? i believe that they should , and that view has been reinforced by some of the powerful speeches that we have heard , such as those of the noble baroness , lady barker , the noble lords , lord black of brentwood , lord smith of finsbury , lord browne of madingley and lord alli , and by some of the letters and e-mails that i have received . i would be proud to share my married status with same-sex couples with a similar commitment to stable and long-term unions . marriage is , after all , a human institution , in the sense that its nature and responsibilities and rights are defined by the state in statute . those definitions , as we have heard , have been adapted over time as the needs and nature of the state have evolved . of course there are also other definitions of marriage , notably those of different religious faiths . they have every right to their own views about what marriage means for them and their adherents . so i welcome the safeguards included in the bill to ensure that no religious organisation or individual minister can be compelled to participate in a same-sex marriage ceremony . i was reassured by the speeches of the noble baroness , lady kennedy , and the noble lord , lord pannick , indicating that the " quadruple lock " will be robust , although it seems odd that we are being asked by the noble lord , lord dear , to reject the bill before this and other issues can be explored more thoroughly in committee . i also welcome clause 8 of the bill , which extends to the church in wales an equivalent right to that of other non-established churches and faiths , to make up its own mind on the question of same-sex marriages . i hope that the day may come before long when the church in wales decides that it is prepared to recognise such marriages . same-sex couples also have the option of civil partnerships , although it is surely anomalous for these to be available to them alone . if my wife and i had had that option as an alternative to marriage , i do not believe that we would have considered it for a moment , because a civil partnership simply does not bring with it those elements of public commitment and social recognition that are central to our view of marriage - what the noble baroness , lady mallalieu , rather splendidly described as the superglue . this debate has raised important issues that need more detailed review and scrutiny , exactly what this house is so good at , and why i believe that the bill should now go forward into committee . in principle , i strongly support the bill , not just as an equality measure whose time is right , but because in my view it will strengthen and enhance the very institution of marriage by extending its availability to all couples who wish to commit themselves publicly to loving , supporting and caring for each other as long as they both shall live .  my lords , this is a momentous piece of legislation , arguably the culmination of a development of the law that began with the wolfenden report . why is it so controversial ? the first reason is that many fear that there will be inadequate protection for religious organisations and individual ministers . there has been a plethora of legal opinions on this subject and i have read , i think , all of them . the main cause of legal alarm in this context is that the european court of human rights , or even our courts interpreting the convention in accordance with the human rights act , may penalise those who for religious reasons do not want to be involved in any way with same-sex marriage . i do not share the enthusiasm of some noble lords for the strasbourg jurisprudence and have very considerable reservations about the human rights act . one of my principal quarrels with the strasbourg court is its repeated failure to afford individual states what is known as " the margin of appreciation " . where parliament has expressed a clear statutory intention or otherwise manifested its view in an unambiguous way , the european court of human rights should be very slow indeed to interfere . however , despite such expressions of purpose - for example , on prisoner voting - strasbourg has decided that our law is non-convention-compliant . however , the court in strasbourg has shown considerably more reluctance to interfere in areas of life where religious freedoms are involved . article 9 of the convention guarantees the right to freedom of religion , and i agree with those distinguished lawyers who have advised on this point . the noble lord , lord pannick , and the noble baroness , lady kennedy , are very confident lawyers . they say that it is inconceivable that there should be a challenge . i am perhaps not as confident as they are - few lawyers are . however , the robustness of the challenge so far seems to be sound . the parliamentary draftsmen , by their so-called quadruple lock , seem to have skilfully ensured that the bill is as strasbourg-proof as it reasonably can be . i have some residual anxiety because the convention is what is called in strasbourg a " living instrument " and there is nothing to prevent the court taking a different view in the future , particularly if one has regard to the rather different approach that is adopted to precedent in strasbourg compared with how our courts operate . however , no government can legislate in complete certainty that a bill will survive any legal challenge . it is almost certain that some litigation will be generated by these provisions . of course , that is not desirable but it cannot be avoided where some who are genuinely alarmed at the change in the law and others who are merely mischievous may seek to use the courts . however , it seems most unlikely that these challenges will produce any success and they should peter out in due course . i do not agree with the scenario described by the noble lord , lord davies of stamford , of endless litigation costing millions of pounds . he did not identify the basis of such potential legal challenges . as well as concerns about religious freedom , there is a substantial body of opinion which feels that this bill undermines " traditional " marriage . this seems a highly respectable and understandable response to such a cultural change . but marriage has changed over the centuries and from generation to generation . i understand the anxieties of those who feel that it is being irrevocably altered , but surely my noble friend lord jenkin is right that marriage will not be changed retrospectively or prospectively by this bill . however , in our desire to embrace equality in this context , we must be careful that we do not create a new illiberalism . to describe those who oppose same-sex marriage as bigoted , even in the first draft of a speech , seems highly regrettable . indeed , i salute the noble lord , lord dear , for his tenacity and sincerity in opposing this bill . on the question of civil partnerships for opposite-sex couples , the government have correctly changed their position to a consultation . i do not think that a party or a prime minister who brings forward this legislation can fairly be regarded as " obsessed " with gay marriage . in fact , one of the consequences that i envisage if this bill becomes law is that the question of somebody 's sexual orientation will become less and less a matter of consequence or even - dare i say ? - of interest . looking back at the debates that followed the wolfenden report is a salutary experience . it was not my party that was responsible for the 1967 act , and i am not altogether convinced - to put it mildly - that if it had been in power such legislation would have been passed . i am therefore particularly pleased that a conservative-led government are responsible for this landmark piece of legislation . i am not making a party-political point because i expect that the party opposite would have brought in similar legislation . but i ask the noble baroness , lady thornton , in her winding-up speech , to confirm whether or not that would have been the case . at a time when we as a parliament are not highly regarded , we should be proud that there are young men and women - and not so young men and women - who will feel more and more that a society that benefits from their contributions in terms of both their talent and their taxes is now valuing them properly and no longer barring entry to what is to so many the central relationship of their life .  my lords , i agree with the last point that the noble lord made . as for the rest of it , i understand the division between legislatures and the people in a rather different way . if i have one perspective , it is from first great western . as a commuter to this house from cardiff central , i have the opportunity to reflect , as i did last evening , as i did this morning and as i will do again tonight . i am still a working politician , elected to the national assembly for wales and representing part of a constituency that i also represented in the other place . therefore , i have the dubious benefit of a dual mandate , although it seems to me that in this house a number of us have had that experience and a number of us have forgotten it or never had it . it seems to me that this house is in great danger of ignoring at its peril the realities of political and social change that is happening outside . that is what i want to address . i am not going to argue about the level of opinion polls , but i am going to argue about the significance of the size of the free vote and the majority in the house of commons on this matter . the second point which i am concerned about , as a former presiding officer in cardiff , is that we are faced this evening with a device of a procedural motion . of course it is in order . this is a self-regulating house and we are very well advised by distinguished officials . i am not arguing with that . what i am saying is this : what is the logic of voting today to deny a second reading to a bill , while at the same time continually defining ourselves as a revising chamber ? by what logic can one revise a text of draft legislation , or anything else , by deleting it ? it is like pushing the delete button before you have read the e-mail . that seems to me what this house is in danger of doing . it leaves no opportunity for proper scrutiny or amendment . my noble friend lord aberdare has already referred to clause 8 . clause 8 is very important to me . it is the devolution clause . it was brought to us from the commons . it will enable the governing body of the church in wales - to which i was once nominated by the current archbishop of wales , and no doubt he regrets that ; i no longer serve on that body - to resolve that the laws of england and wales could be changed to allow for the marriage of same-sex couples according to the rites of the church in wales , were that body to agree . this is a resolution for which i devoutly wish , along with my other noble friends on these benches . if this bill , including this clause , is to be derailed this evening , the opportunity for us welsh anglicans to determine our own rights , in a church disestablished since 1920 , will be denied , and we will remain mere altar servers at the bench of bishops of the church of england . if this happens , i can promise you that this issue will not go away . we will continue to campaign with stonewall cymru , gay christians and others for the law of marriage to be devolved in wales as it is in scotland , and of course as it was in the golden age of medieval welsh law under cyfraith hywel . for all these reasons , i appeal to this house , and even to those of your lordships who oppose the principle of this legislation , to allow us who want to debate it to debate the bill further , because that debate will not go away until the equal relationship enjoyed by my son and my son-in-law can be free for everyone .  my lords , i will speak briefly but strongly in support of the bill , and will make only three points . first , attitudes to social issues evolve , and society must evolve with them . i spent much of my working life in the foreign office . two generations ago , women had to resign from the foreign office on marrying - today , that is unimaginable . i remember how a generation ago gay men and women , if discovered , had to resign from the foreign office - also unimaginable today . as permanent secretary at the foreign office some 10 years ago , i well remember attending a meeting open to all staff that was addressed by ben summerskill of stonewall . he explained convincingly the benefits to us , and indeed to any organisation , of recognising diversity , whether gender , sexual or racial , thereby bringing out the best in individuals , institutions and our society . today it is entirely right and proper that we respect the right of those same-sex couples who wish to see their relationships regarded by society as marriage . i must say to the right reverend prelates - and it is a rare privilege to be able to address so many at the same time - that i hope before long it will be possible for them to celebrate and to bless such unions themselves . this leads me to my second point . i myself have been happily married for 38 years . sadly , my wife and i do not have children of our own , but we have nieces , nephews and godchildren who are happily married . i simply cannot see how those relationships are in any way diminished by recognising that loving relationships by same-sex partners should also be regarded as marriage . to share with others what we value ourselves is surely the sign of a civilised , tolerant and , yes , christian society . that brings me to my final point . in our society today , and in much of what we see happening elsewhere in the world , there is a growth of intolerance , divisiveness and conflict . the bill before us goes in the other direction . it recognises the richness and diversity of human life , shows tolerance to others and reflects the evolution of our own society , reflected particularly in the views of the young , who are our future . it is a bill whose time has surely come , and one that i am happy and proud to support .  my lords , we have criss-crossed the issues of principle over these two days , but i will not add to that element of the discussion . at this stage of this long debate , i want to stick to constitutional points . various speeches , starting with the courageous speech of the noble lord , lord dear , have referred to the constitutional position of the house of lords . doubt has been cast , by him and others , on the validity of the commons ' decision . it is said that the whips overdid it to such an extent that we should discount the commons ' two-to-one support for the bill , and should use our undoubted reserve power to refuse to discuss the bill any further . that view is mistaken . it exaggerates the whips ' influence , particularly on a free vote on a matter of conscience , and i speak as a former government whip in the commons for eight years , during two parliaments . it also discounts the constituency pressures on mps . we have heard about the lack of commitment in the most recent manifestos , but it is not the previous election that focuses mps ' minds on constituents ' views when deciding how to speak or vote ; rather , it is the next election that they are looking at . that is why they pay careful attention to constituents ' views , late in a parliament in particular , in politically uncertain times . there is no excuse for this appointed house to overrule the elected house and say that the bill is so erroneous that we refuse to discuss it further . i am aware of that . nevertheless , it is entirely possible that it becomes law exactly in the position in which it now stands . the question that underlies this is whether we or the house of commons are the better judges of changing public attitudes on matters such as this . with our average age , i do not think that we are the better judges . as i have indicated , another theme of the debate is whether the safeguards for the churches , teachers and registrars are sufficient , and whether the bill is properly drafted . that is for the house to consider in committee . the commons committee stage has also been criticised , but that is not a reason to avoid a committee stage here . it is a reason for having one , to consider the detailed provisions with care and the expertise that are available to this house . this revising chamber should not block the commons ' will so clearly expressed and refuse to consider what revisions may be desirable . i shall therefore vote against the amendment and for the second reading .  my lords , i congratulate the minister on the way in which she introduced the bill yesterday - a long time ago now . she did it with skill and great courage . i hope that she will have the opportunity to take the bill through the house in committee , and that later today the house will reject the amendment moved by the noble lord , lord dear . i hope , too , that it will take careful account of the very wise words that we have just heard from the noble lord , lord cope , about the consequences for this house of rejecting the bill at second reading . i remind noble lords that even the hunting bill , which had fewer supporters in the house than this bill , was given a second reading and eventually failed in committee . to deny this bill a second reading would leave it open to the other place to reintroduce the bill in exactly the form that it is in now , as the noble lord , lord cope , said . that would be a dreadful mistake and would reflect very badly on this house . i strongly support the bill for two reasons . first , unlike some other speakers , i believe that it will strengthen marriage as an institution , not weaken it . secondly , it will demonstrate a commitment on behalf of parliament as a whole to remove all remaining obstacles to treating gay and straight people in exactly the same way . i suspect that in five years ' time , or perhaps sooner , we will look back and wonder what on earth all the fuss was about . our children and grandchildren rub their eyes in disbelief at how our generation still finds issues of sexuality so difficult to come to terms with . i am not a member of the church of england . i was brought up by parents who were both nonconformists , and i would not presume to argue the finer points of anglican theology with right reverend prelates and other members of your lordships ' house who are steeped in that faith . however , it is worth drawing attention to the fact that there is more than one view about the bill within the anglican communion . a number of noble lords have drawn attention to the letter sent to my noble friend lord alli by the bishop of salisbury . i will say a word about new zealand ; i think that only the noble lord , lord birt , has mentioned it so far in the debate . the marriage (definition of marriage) amendment bill was passed as recently as 17 april , amid scenes of huge rejoicing in the chamber and the singing of a maori love song when the vote was announced . as part of the preparation for that bill , a select committee looked at it . it received representations from a retired bishop , richard randerson , who is a leading theologian . he said that he supported the purpose of the bill because he believed that it was consistent with christian principle . he said that the anglican definition and understanding of marriage had changed over the years , a point made by the bishop of salisbury in his letter , and could now be modified again to be inclusive of gay and lesbian couples . he said that same-sex couples may also be , " united in heart , body and soul ... and in their union fulfil their love for each other " . he said that they may also , " provide the stability necessary for family life , so that children might be cared for lovingly and grow to full maturity " . the evidence is that there are same-sex couples in long-term , committed relationships , and research shows that children may be cared for equally well by same-sex couples and by heterosexual ones . that point was made in a very powerful letter that we received from dr barnardo 's , which wrote to us about the bill . certainly , nowhere in scripture is the concept of loving , committed , same-sex relationships envisaged . equally , though , one cannot find a biblical text on the subject of nuclear bombs or genetic modification . one must look for the deeper biblical principles . i will quote bishop randerson again , who said : " such principles include love for god and neighbour . such love encompasses the marriage relationship between a man and a woman , and may be found also in a same-sex context . the ethical criterion is to do with the quality of the relationship , not the orientation of the partners " . our current knowledge about sexual orientation has changed . homosexuality is not a sin or an aberration , but is as natural for many in our society as heterosexuality is for others . i conclude by quoting a few words from an e-mail i received last week from an american lady at the university of minnesota , which has an exchange agreement with our university of worcester . i met this lady , called linda , when her students were over here . she writes , " we were recently granted equality in minnesota and i honestly don 't have words to express the feelings of acceptance that the law had given me . to be treated just like everyone else is a joyous experience . my partner of twenty six years and i plan on marrying this summer . i humbly request that you vote to grant this right to all of the lesbian and gay citizens of the united kingdom " . that is certainly what i intend to do , and i hope that the house will have the opportunity to take this bill forward .  my lords , i have listened with great respect and interest to the passion and concerns that arise from the redefinition of marriage set out in this bill . i have spent the past few months researching a television proposal on the history of various christian institutions , and one of the main areas of my research was the institution of marriage . as has been mentioned by many noble lords , including the noble lord , lord faulkner of worcester , it is clear that over the 2 ,000 year-long history of christian marriage it has been open to continual redefinition both by the church and the state . i have gone back to the early church , in which marriage was seen as a contract between a man and a woman . it was adorned by christ 's presence and commended by st paul . but for nearly 1 ,000 years after christ , there was no such thing as a church wedding ; marriage remained a civil ceremony , even for christians . the church recognised only baptism and the eucharist as sacraments , which were performed inside the church , while marriage was often performed at a slight distance from the church building . i found proof of this in an english medieval liturgical text , the sarum rite , which suggested that marriage should take place in the church porch , rather than in front of the altar , as happens in church weddings today . the big change came in the 11th century , when reforms initiated by pope gregory vii meant that the church started to take control and redefine marriage in many different ways . most importantly , it laid down that marriage was now a sacrament , an eternal union of a man and a woman divinely dispensed , one of seven sacraments . the rules of marriage were changed , laying down in canon law that it was not possible to marry within seven degrees of consanguinity and even prohibiting marrying godparents or their children without the church 's dispensation . the church control of marriage broke down when the reformation swept through northern europe in the 16th century . the protestant reformers once again saw marriage as a contract . in england , marriage was no longer regarded as a biblical sacrament . in the church of england 's 25th article of religion , this status was reserved only for baptism and the supper of the lord . a marriage was administered by the parties to the marriage , with the church merely blessing it . in archbishop cranmer 's prayer book of 1549 , the first prayer book in english , marriage was ordained for the procreation and nurture of children , and as a remedy against sin - but very significantly , also , for the , " mutual society , help and comfort " , of man and wife . in other words , for the first time in christian liturgy , marriage was defined as about the happiness of two individuals . these principles of marriage have been continually redefined over the last two centuries by both church and state . the supposedly lifelong nature of marriage was redefined by the state in 1857 , with the passing of the matrimonial causes act . marriage was no longer eternal ; it could end in divorce . the church 's control of marriage was broken by establishing a central divorce court in london unattached to the church . at the time , this change in the nature of marriage outraged many anglicans , and some prominent clergy left the church of england in protest , but divorce is now a feature in anglican life . it is not just the state which has redefined marriage ; so has the church . the 1549 prayer book made it clear that the wife was unequal to her husband , but this part of the marriage contract was redefined in 1927 , when the church of england introduced an alternative marriage service . it removed the wife 's vow of obedience in the marriage service and proposed instead that she should now make the same vow as her husband , to honour and love her spouse . but the ruling stirred huge debate in the national assembly of the church , with opposition being led by lord hugh cecil and athelstan riley . the latter declared that " there can be no equality in matters of sexual morality between men and women as it pleased god to create a profound inequality between men and women " . this was said just before women were given universal suffrage in 1928 . as has been mentioned by many noble lords , the stipulation in the 1549 prayer book that marriage should be for the procreation and nurture of children was also redefined at the beginning of the last century by changes in the church of england 's view on the use of contraception in marriage at a series of lambeth conferences . in the 1908 conference , they referred to contraception with repugnance as " an evil which jeopardises the purity of family life " . in 1920 , the bishops at the conference still expressed their grave concern at the spread of , " theories and practices hostile to the family " . they made no attempt to lay down rules to meet every case . but by 1930 , there was an entirely different mood . the lambeth conference acknowledged that there would be occasions when , " a clearly felt obligation to limit or avoid parenthood " , and , " a morally sound reason for avoiding complete abstinence " , would justify contraception in the light of christian principles . despite much principled opposition , the church of england had agreed a direct connection between contraception and accepting that sex within marriage was not only for the purpose of procreation . in 2009 , the quakers made their own great leap of redefinition set out in this bill . they agreed , as many noble lords have already mentioned , to support same-sex marriage at their meetings . it seems that marriage has undergone many redefinitions over its huge history . many were fiercely opposed at the time , but they went ahead anyway . looking to the future , i picked up on the concern of my noble friend lord dear , that this redefinition will lead to an increase of homophobic attacks , as has been happening in france , so i looked at what has happened in other countries which have introduced a same-sex marriage act . sweden did so in may 2009 and , according to the swedish national council for crime prevention , which is an agency of the swedish ministry of justice , in 2008 - that is a year before the act was passed - there were 1 ,046 attacks , but in 2010 , there were 750 , a decrease of 28% . and this in a country which is becoming less tolerant as the riots across its cities last month have shown . considering the many redefinitions of marriage that we have seen over its long history , i think that this new redefinition should be debated by this house . i therefore reject the amendment .  my lords , it is in the nature of taking part in debates in your lordships ' house that the longer the debate goes on , the less one feels like taking part and the more one feels like taking notes . the past two days have been an example of that . i want to focus on one aspect . i am concerned that politicians and religious communities have spent far too much time making the case for what we believe marriage is not , and insufficient time in making the case for what it is , what it could be and what it should be . marriage and the family are the basic building blocks of our society . it is more than the ultimate b&b , taxi service and atm . at its best it is a school , a hospital , a welfare system , a justice system , a library , a bank , a care system , and a playground . it is the place where we learn our values and how to interact with each other . marriage is irreplaceable and those who doubt its value to society need only look at the alternative when the state is forced to take children into care . those who have the privilege of growing up in a stable home of that nature have higher health and wealth outcomes than their unmarried counterparts . marriages fail - more than one-third fail before their 20th anniversary - but businesses fail too , yet we have not found a better way of creating wealth and opportunity , although we have tried . if the parameters for marriage are expanded through this legislation , will it lessen or devalue my own marriage ? the answer can only be that it will not . that can only be a matter for my wife and i - how we choose to honour the vows we made and the love we expressed for each other and how we do that each and every day . i do not make my marriage " more " by claiming that other relationships are " less " . however , there is another concern which is real , and it is this . could this legislation be portrayed or interpreted by some as an attack on the institution of marriage itself ? i received a total of 164 communications on this matter , including 116 letters and 48 e-mails . of the letters , 107 were against and only eight were in favour of the bill . of the e-mails , 24 were against and 24 were for the bill . it would be difficult to pick up a common theme running through the letters and communications that i received but , if i were to do so , it would probably be people writing to say , " marriage is sacred and special , and we 're worried that this bill may damage it in some way " . i acknowledge that that impression is plausible , given how this measure has been presented , and that is why bringing forward a measure that was not in the manifesto should have been accompanied by the bringing forward of measures that were - for example , recognising the importance of marriage in the tax and benefits systems . investment in marriage probably has the best multiplier effect on the health and wealth of society , yet so often we take it for granted . however , there is also a responsibility on religious organisations , which , rather than lamenting that the end is nigh for marriage , should be celebrating more what marriage does and acknowledging the work of organisations such as relate , founded by a clergyman , herbert gray , 70 years ago , or care for the family , founded by rob and di parsons 25 years ago , which provide practical help to people to keep going through tough times . marriage will survive and adapt in the future , as it has in the past , not because of any legislation that says so but because it manifestly works better than all the other systems that have been tried . with that , i come to my closing remarks , which relate to the nature of the amendment . i have thought very carefully about the way that the amendment was put forward and about its appropriateness . some of the arguments here have focused on the need to give this legislation more consideration . we need to check that the balances and safeguards that have been presented are adequate , and what better place to do that than in your lordships ' house ? that therefore suggests that the bill should be allowed to proceed to committee and report , where we would be able to revise it . the second point that i want to mention was made , i think , by the noble lord , lord dear , who referred to the perhaps supine nature of some of our colleagues in the other place when they considered this matter . it was suggested that they were conscious of their own careers and were informally whipped into the lobbies . i wish that , for example , the government chief whip in the other place were here to give evidence about how uncontrollable the government benches , in particular , are there , even with a three-line whip , never mind a free vote . therefore , claiming that this was anything other than a sincerely intended and deliberate statement of intent and desire would , i think , be wrong . my final reason for not supporting the amendment - i speak as someone who has served as a member of the whips ' office at both ends - is that i think it is a tactical mistake . some people , including me , have some very serious reservations about the bill as it currently stands , and we would like to see those tested by members of this house , through amendments tabled and reasoned , before we give our consent to the bill at third reading . however , we are being put in the position of having to decide on a constitutional issue - namely , whether we should try , at second reading , to close off a bill which has come to us from the other place with a majority of 225 on a free vote . personally , i should like to see the bill proceed to committee and report , and then to be able to offer my view at third reading , rather than have that debate and your lordships ' scrutiny pre-empted .  my lords , i support the bill . i do not understand why there is such opposition . most people now accept equality as a desirable aspect of society . achieving this has been a long struggle , and unfortunately there is still a criminal element which is responsible for homophobic violence . yet most people , including those who oppose the bill , would strongly deny homophobia . they accept that we now have civil partnerships . those of us who always supported gay rights believe that we have won the popular argument . then why not accept the government 's bill ? why not have same-sex marriages , if that is what two people who are deeply committed to each other really want ? why such strong opposition ? it is strong enough to have kept us arguing for most of yesterday and a great deal of today . those who are opposed to the bill tend to talk about their values . do they think that people like me have no values ? of course we do . we believe in fairness , in tolerance , in compassion and , yes , in kindness to others who may be different but whose way of life harms absolutely no one . this afternoon we heard the argument that somehow this damages the institution of marriage . i do not understand that at all . i believe in marriage . i am now a widow , but i was happily married for more than 40 years before my husband sadly died . he was an artist , and like most artists believed in equality . we had friends whom we knew were gay , and that was a matter for them . we liked them and supported the campaign for gay rights . my husband would certainly have supported my agreement with the government 's bill . those in opposition to the bill who talk about tradition should remember that marriage itself has evolved over the years . it has evolved in order to come to terms with the greater equality of women . in the 19th century a married woman was virtually her husband 's possession , with no rights outside the marriage and not very many within it , and no right of inheritance . remember the novels of jane austen . marriage has changed in order to deal with the change in the status of women in society . i believe that we should also come to terms with the change in society in relation to homosexual relationships . there have been some religious objections , but the text of the proposed legislation attempts to make provision for those on an individual basis . that has been acknowledged in the church of england 's briefing . i am a secularist , but i believe strongly in the right of those who are religious to practise and preach their religion . what i do not agree with is any attempt to impose a particular way of thinking or acting on others who do not share a particular religious view , which i think some in opposition to the bill are attempting to do . we shall not let that happen . not all clerics are opposed to the bill . if such clerics wish to officiate in a same-sex marriage they should be able to do so . we heard yesterday from quakers , methodists , and those of other faiths who support the bill and agree with that point of view . i realise , of course , that there are countries where the views i have expressed are not acceptable . usually in such countries homosexuals are brutally persecuted , and women are treated dreadfully badly as well . we should be proud of the fact that over the years previous generations have changed society in this country very much for the better . that is a tradition which we should all support . therefore , the bill , which is in line with this reforming tradition , should be accepted and the amendment of the noble lord , lord dear , should be thoroughly defeated .  my lords , the great majority of young people are baffled by the fuss over same-sex marriage . in terms of change happening , they do not see a huge gulf between civil partnerships and marriage , even as we need to acknowledge that the distinction is important for gays and lesbians who wish to be married . the latest yougov poll for the sunday times last month had under-40s in favour of same-sex marriage by more than three to one . indeed , some young people that i have talked to believe that same-sex marriage already exists in this country , and are surprised that this is not yet the case . young people 's opinion is well in advance of the legislation itself . there are some in favour of the bill who have argued that , with the conditions attached , it takes a modest and reasonable step . i do not entirely agree with that assessment because real progress in human rights , which is what the bill is about - a point made yesterday by the noble baroness , lady lister of burtersett - always enters new territory and is always difficult for some , if not , in this case , for the majority of young people . the bill will redefine marriage but , i believe , for the better . the institution of marriage as it stands is the last redoubt of discrimination against gays and lesbians . it reminds me of the latter-day struggles that women have had , long after they won the right to vote , to gain access to the pubs and clubs , among other places , from which , in many communities , they continued to be excluded - excluding them from defining aspects of the culture . whatever people think of marriage , and , as we have heard in this debate , there are those who are critical of marriage as a formal institution , the reality is that marriage is a defining aspect of our culture . however , just as we are in the process of restructuring our social and work meeting places , so we also need to redefine marriage to make it a more inclusive institution . the letter from the right reverend prelate the bishop of bristol and others published in the daily telegraph on saturday says that : " marriage between a man and a woman is the fundamental building block of human society " . apart from the highly questionable assertion that marriage in any form is the fundamental building block , i would argue that it is not the constituent sexes that make it a building block but the public act of commitment by two individuals to each other , as some brilliant , heartfelt speeches have already made clear . we should recall elizabeth i 's dictum not to be making " windows into men 's souls " , a politic plea for religious tolerance in her own time that , in ours , should become an acceptance that there are many valid reasons why two people wish to get married . no church , whatever its policy , should have a monopoly over this institution , and quakers and other churches that wish to perform same-sex marriages should be allowed to do so . this will be the meaning of equality . as the mayor of new york , michael bloomberg , said in the guardian : " religious tolerance is a vital part of a democratic society . but religious rules should never dictate society 's laws " . furthermore , those who see marriage in a traditional sense are missing the much wider picture that unusual or even themed weddings that do not have religious content in any formal manner are already taking place . heterosexual couples are introducing their own personal or spiritual stamps on their marriages . therefore , it seems doubly ironic that a gay or lesbian who is a practising christian and has been going to church on a weekly basis over a long period of time may have no claim over having a church marriage , whereas a non-believer has . that is a matter for the church , though , and the speeches that we have heard over the past two days from christians give me hope that things will change . as someone who is married and therefore part of the institution of marriage , i would be embarrassed if , at the very least , the opportunity presented by this bill was not taken to allow others who have been excluded to now be able to participate . on civil partnerships , i agree with what peter tatchell has said about equality . the important thing is get the bill on the statute book . i suspect that it will become clear quite quickly that heterosexual couples will be at a disadvantage over the choice of form of union that they can opt for and that further legislation will be needed to correct this if the correction is not included in the bill , which would be more efficient . it is perhaps most immediately important to ensure that heterosexual and gay couples have the same , equal rights in terms of survivor benefits . looking around the house , i think it would be fair to say that most of our marital choices have already been made , whether that means having married once , twice or more , or not - yet . but the young people of this country who are still to make these choices are very clear about how they feel about same-sex marriage and what they want us to do . if this house were to vote the bill down - i say " were " because i do not believe that that will happen - it would show itself to be seriously out of touch with the youth of the country . i support the bill and will vote against the amendment of the noble lord , lord dear .  my lords , at this stage of such a very fine debate , with outstanding contributions and powerful arguments on both sides , finding something new to say is quite a challenge . we have heard from a number of noble lords with strong and long-standing marriages , including my noble kinsman , whose diamond wedding the rest of the jenkin family were happy to celebrate last year . as a conservative , with a mere silver wedding approaching , i strongly believe in marriage as a force for good and i lament its decline in our society . we know that married couples are twice as likely to stay together as those who cohabit . now we have people who want to get married , to make a lifetime commitment , yet some of us are not sure whether we should allow that to happen . let us be clear : marriage and the lifelong commitment it involves are far from easy , and a successful marriage takes work . we do not do enough to help floundering marriages and struggling relationships , such as strengthening them and rewarding people for doing the right thing . we should . but stopping gay people marrying is not part of that . at the heart of this bill is a straightforward proposition . if a couple love each other , why should the state stop them getting married unless there is a good reason ? in this day and age , being gay is not a good reason - if indeed it ever was . of course , for some religions and faiths , this goes beyond their beliefs . as a result , the bill specifically protects the rights of those who do not agree and does not compel anyone to do anything . all religious organisations are free to choose whether to opt in or out . the bill simply allows people to get married - a clear and simple objective , delivered in a way that promotes and protects religious freedom . we have heard quotes from the correspondence we have all received . i would like to read a few remarks from an e-mail from a church of england vicar , well known to me , which seem to get to the heart of the matter . he said : " i have come to the firm conclusion that there is nothing to fear in gay marriage and indeed that it will be a positive good , not just for same-gender unions but for the institution of marriage generally . the effect will be to place centrally in marriage the idea of a stable , loving relationship , rather than anything else . rather than this being a dramatic change , it is actually a radical reform (in the proper sense of ' radical ') recalling the institution to the heart of its real meaning " . those are wise words and ones that i hope in due course his church and mine will come to accept . the other main argument against the legislation is that it would undermine marriage . however , i have not heard a convincing explanation of how it would undermine marriage . yes , it is controversial , but decriminalising homosexuality was controversial , as was equalising the age of consent . it was also controversial when the labour government rightly legislated for civil partnerships . once those things were done and the world did not end , public opinion changed , and that is what will happen when this legislation is passed . i am part of that changing public opinion . i am by nature a small " c " conservative . i do not like change . there is a part of me which longs for the simpler , safer world of my childhood . i admire those like my noble friends lord fowler and lady noakes and my noble kinsman lord jenkin who have been totally consistent in their approach , but to be honest i am not sure whether i would have supported this bill 15 or 20 years ago . i was sitting on the steps of the throne during yesterday 's debate next to the noble lord , lord filkin , when his 2004 speech was quoted . he turned to me and said , " i was wrong . i have changed my mind " . he is right . times have changed , and i have changed , and one of the reasons why i now support the bill is because i have children in their twenties who , like many other young people in their teens , twenties and thirties - whose voice incidentally has been lacking from the national debate over the past few months - just do not understand what on earth the fuss is about . as others have said , the polls all show younger people to be overwhelmingly in favour of the bill . my own sons have said that they are proud of me , their father , and indeed their grand- father , for supporting the bill , and would have been ashamed had we voted against it . we need to recognise that for conservatism to work , we have to accept that the world changes . if we do not , we become an anachronism .  my lords , since 1997 the situation for lesbian , gay and bisexual people in britain has changed significantly . with the exception of civil marriage , we have full legal equality . much of that progress was made , i am proud to say , under the previous government . however , i am also proud that across all political parties there is now a consensus that respects the right of lesbian and gay people to celebrate their relationships . britain can now rightly claim to be a beacon to the world for the equality of gay people . on this final step i am immensely proud of our prime minister , who is prepared to stand up and be counted . his personal commitment to equality in marriage is something that i celebrate . my husband - i can think of no better term for him - and i have taken every opportunity given to us to celebrate our 16-year relationship on an equal footing in civic society . when parliamentary opposition , particularly in this house , delayed progress on civil partnerships , we went ahead with a ceremony in london city hall under the auspices of the gla . after the bill was finally passed , rafael and i legally tied the knot in islington town hall . it was a very moving moment for us , our family and our friends , to be part of a ceremony that finally gave legal recognition to the inherent worth of a loving relationship between two people of the same sex . i am glad that , some years later , some who opposed the civil partnership legislation have spoken in the debate and appear to have had a change of heart . i hope that it is because they are persuaded by seeing how the law has helped to transform the lives of lesbian and gay people in this country , rather than an attempt to frustrate this move to full equality . in the debate , reference has been made to the bishop of salisbury , who wrote that open recognition and public support have increased in civil partnerships those very qualities for which marriage itself is so highly regarded : increasing commitment to working on the relationship itself ; contributing to the well-being of both families of origin ; and acting as responsible and open members of society . he went on to say that : " indeed the development of marriage for same sex couples is a very strong endorsement of the institution of marriage " . i go with that . the quadruple locks contained in the bill provide extraordinarily robust protection for those religious bodies , including the church of england , unwilling or unable to conduct same-sex marriage , without being accused of being homophobic . it is also , of course , a matter of religious freedom that those religions and churches that want to conduct same-sex marriages should be able to do so . with so much to be proud of , why do we need this legislation ? for me and rafael , it is for our relationship to be equal in the eyes of the law . there is no doubt that the changes that we have seen so far have helped to shape more progressive attitudes but , in my view , far from inciting intolerance , this measure will go a long way towards challenging it . as my noble friend lady royall highlighted yesterday , a real problem remains . there are 20 ,000 homophobic crimes annually and 800 ,000 people in five years have witnessed homophobic bullying at work . an even more dreadful statistic is that 96% of young lgbt people in secondary schools routinely hear homophobic language . three in five who experience homophobic bullying say that teachers who witnessed it never intervened . we have heard lots of references to letters and e-mails , some of which i was proud to receive . unfortunately , some of those letters and e-mails to me also provided evidence , which i am sure your lordships have seen , of continued prejudice towards me and my community . being defined as immoral and evil is just for starters . statements made by many public figures recently have compared same-sex relationships with child abuse , slavery and bestiality . i have heard those comments . there is no point in noble lords shaking their heads , those opinions still resonate in our society . comments like that fuel aggression and homophobic bullying and cause damage to the self-esteem not only of people such as me but of young people in particular . by passing the bill , parliament is sending a clear message : that lesbian , gay , bisexual and transgender people are equal and deserve the same rights and respect as every other citizen .  my lords , i have sat here listening to every single speech yesterday and today . i sometimes think we should strike campaign medals . the objections to the bill have been on grounds of process - that it was not properly scrutinised in the other place and that it was in no party 's manifesto - and because of what the bill seeks to achieve . the objections in regard to process can be dealt with briefly as they have been addressed by others . as the noble baroness , lady mallalieu , observed , we have frequently complained that bills arrive here from the house of commons not having been properly scrutinised . it is a novel doctrine to say that we should reject them , not least given that our principal purpose - although not our only purpose - is to engage in legislative scrutiny . the point about the bill not being a manifesto commitment was dealt with most effectively by the noble lord , lord kerr of kinlochard . governments have a permissive mandate , not just a prescriptive one , and to reject this bill because it was not a manifesto commitment would , again , inject a novel doctrine which would lead us to regularly reject a good number of bills in each parliament . furthermore , as my noble friend lady berridge noted , if we reject the bill it becomes eligible next session for passage under the parliament act . if the other place insists on the bill , it can ensure that it is enacted in the form in which it left the commons the first time - in other words , the bill as is now before us . this house may delay it , but it would have no effect on the content . i turn to the arguments that focus on the content of the bill . many have justified the bill on grounds of equality ; i approach it from a different perspective . for me it is a question of freedom : freedom for those faiths which wish to conduct same-sex marriages , and freedom for those who wish to marry . given that there are grounds for taking this as an issue of freedom , there would need to be compelling grounds to deny such freedom . what , then , are the arguments ? we have heard that we should not favour a small minority against the wishes of the majority . the problems with this are twofold : one factual and the other a basic issue of principle . the ipsos mori polls from early this century demonstrate a clear shift of opinion in support of same-sex marriage . i say to the noble lord , lord brennan , that i prefer survey data as being somewhat more reliable than anecdote and assertion . we should regard the letters we receive as political intelligence , not somehow a reflection of public opinion . as my noble friend lady noakes has noted , all recent opinion polls where the question has been a simple , straightforward one of being for or against same-sex marriage have shown majority support . the recent yougov poll is especially revealing . not only is same-sex marriage supported , overwhelmingly so by those aged under 40 , but also by women , by a margin of about two to one . opposition appears to come predominantly from older males . i am inclined to say that you know who you are , my lords . furthermore , in the poll the percentage strongly in support of same-sex marriage is notably higher than the percentage strongly opposed . as for those who claim that it will cost my party the next election , the poll shows that of those for whom it will be an important issue at the next election , more said that they would be more likely to vote for a party that supports same-sex marriage than those who said that they would be less likely to do so . the issue of principle relates to writing off minorities because they are minorities , not least those which may not be popular with some sections of society . homosexuals have been discriminated against and still are , appallingly so in many countries . to discriminate against a category of persons , to deny them freedoms accorded others because of the characteristics which they have not chosen but which set them apart , is fundamentally objectionable in a democratic society . we are told that it is not up to parliament to redefine marriage . this demonstrates ignorance of our constitutional arrangements and of our history . parliament can redefine marriage and , as we have heard , parliament has redefined marriage . it has done so frequently since the marriage act 1541 , as illustrated by the noble lord , lord pannick . indeed , as we have heard , that is just as well , otherwise we should still be treating marriage as the transfer of the property of the woman from the father to the husband . what are the grounds for saying that parliament should not exercise its rights to extend the provision of marriage ? it is claimed that permitting same-sex marriage devalues marriage . that is not an argument but rather an assertion of moral superiority . it rests in good measure on a rewriting of history - a point well made by the noble baroness , lady neuberger , and indeed the noble viscount , lord colville of culross - and on biblical text . the bible has been used to justify all sorts of discrimination that we now regard as morally abhorrent . as the right reverend prelate the bishop of salisbury has noted , the text of the bible has not changed , but our understanding has . in every sphere of life we are constantly learning , except , apparently , in this one respect , where we cling to a view held 4 ,000 years ago . much of the debate has been conducted as if we were the first nation contemplating the introduction of same-sex marriage . we can learn from what has happened elsewhere . most of the nations that permit same-sex marriage are signatories to the european convention on human rights . their churches have not been forced to do anything by the european court of human rights that they do not wish to do . we have heard assertions in this debate that the introduction of same-sex marriage has led to a decline in heterosexual marriage . i have the figures here , which are readily available in the briefing paper produced by the house of commons library . some countries have seen a decline in traditional marriage , notably portugal and spain , but in portugal that was happening before the introduction of same-sex marriage . in belgium the figures for traditional marriages went up , not down . a study of the netherlands found that trends in marriage and divorce did not change . in nations where it has been introduced , support for same-sex marriage has increased , and none of the dire consequences predicted as a result of the passage of this bill appear to have been experienced . of course , if anyone can show otherwise , they can bring it up in committee . the noble lord , lord brennan , said , " what next ? " well , nothing , unless we will it . things will not happen unless parliament decides that something should happen . that is a key point . nothing is suddenly going to translate from this action unless parliament wants any further action to be taken . it is in our gift . i end with the words of paul parker of the quakers in britain : " for us marriage is not a mere civil contract , but a religious act . while we don 't seek to impose this on anyone , for us this is an issue of religious freedom " . the principled case for supporting the bill is , to my mind , compelling .  my lords , i am pleased to be here and that i heard the noble lord , lord forsyth , coming over the hill as cavalry in aid of the noble lord , lord dear . it is an honour to give the opposition winding speech on this second reading debate in your lordships ' house . i am not envious of the task that the minister has in answering the substantial and passionate debate that we have had for the past two days . my noble friend lady royall outlined most eloquently in her opening remarks the reasons why labour is supporting this bill and the government , but as in the commons there will be a free vote . i shall not repeat all of her arguments . when we are contemplating something new , i always think that international comparisons are helpful . last month this house supported making caste discrimination part of our legislative equality framework . in doing this , and persuading the government and the commons that it was the right thing to do , we were blazing an international trail of which we should be proud . today , we are not being so adventurous , because we are proposing that the uk will soon join those countries that have now signed same-sex marriage into law . they are argentina , belgium , canada , denmark , iceland , the netherlands , portugal , norway , spain , south africa , sweden , uruguay and now france . i offer my congratulations to vincent autin and bruno boileau on their marriage last week . it was historic for being the first same-sex marriage to take place in france following president hollande 's signing of the legislation into law . first and foremost , it was a momentous day for this couple , who on that day made a loving and lifelong commitment to one another before their friends and family , just as i and many in this house have done over the years . the objections to the bill to bring same-sex marriage onto the statute book seem to fall into two or three categories . there are noble lords who are uncertain that freedom of religion will be respected by the bill . to them i say that the government have built huge safeguards into the bill , which , it is widely agreed , will do the job . the most reverend primate and the right reverend prelates who have spoken have woven brilliant theology and arguments against the principle of same-sex marriage , but as the noble baroness , lady neuberger , my noble friend lady mallalieu and others have said , the state 's concept of marriage has been ever-evolving . it has long since diverged from religious teaching . they have not managed to unpick the locks , so to speak . while lawyers can always find something to disagree about , i would encourage those noble lords to read back the speeches of the noble lord , lord pannick , and my noble friend lady kennedy of the shaws , who have explained the strong assurances that legal security is provided by the bill . some concerns have been raised by noble lords about the position of teachers and faith schools in reconciling their views of marriage with the new reality . my party is confident that the current law achieves the right balance in securing the right of faith schools to educate pupils in a way that is sensitive to the law of the land and also to students , some of whom may be gay or have parents of the same sex . i may never use these words again , but i agree with the evidence that michael gove gave to the scrutiny committee stage in the commons . however , it is right that these issues will be tested and scrutinised by this house in committee , because it is right that these questions and concerns are allayed . there are those who say that the bill is in some ways anti-democratic , that it was not in manifestos , that there was no green paper - and , they add , let us rubbish the consultation - and they ask why it was not a private member 's bill . the noble lords , lord norton and lord kerr , covered the constitutional points , and i agree with their analysis . we have to look at the strength of feeling in favour of the bill in the commons . it is remarkable that the majorities at second reading and third reading were so large . it may serve the opponents ' purpose to suggest that some kind of secret whip was applied , but i am with the noble lords , lord cope and lord bates , about the whippability of such an issue . many mps thought very hard about the bill and had serious discussions with constituents before deciding how to vote , but each mp made a decision alone about whether to support it , and so must we . rarely as parliamentarians do we have the opportunity , by the words that we use and the votes that we cast today , to affirm the equal respect that we have for our fellow citizens regardless of their sexuality and the equal respect that we have for their long-term and loving relationships . we have also had a bit of scaremongering . scaremongering to further an argument in which you passionately believe is a legitimate debating ploy , but noble lords are wise and experienced enough to recognise scaremongering when they see it . we can safely say that the noble lord , lord tebbit , won the award for this one . in a short and sharp intervention , he managed with his usual skill to provide a scare for almost everything , including compulsory promotion of homosexual marriage and artificial insemination of the heir to the throne . yes , goal . i am happy to say that it is the minister who answers the questions here . the noble lord , lord dear , also did quite well in the old scaremongering field when he said that some 8 ,000 amendments might be required by this legislation . i thought that that was remarkable and checked whether it is true . i am pleased to reassure the house that this seems not to be the case . the noble lord seems to have confused the fact that there are indeed 8 ,000 references to marriage within the total library of legislation , without the need to amend them all . furthermore , it is clear from discussion with the bill team and reading the bill that clause 11 and schedule 4 deal more than adequately with his concerns . i am sure that the bill team will be happy to explain this to the noble lord in due course . other noble lords feel uncomfortable with what they see as a departure from traditional marriage . i do not doubt that this is how they feel , but i ask them to reflect a little deeper on those feelings . is it habit and familiarity that make change uncomfortable and unsettling ? this was referred to by the noble baroness , lady jenkin . the minister noted that we all move at a different pace when faced with change . as the noble lord , lord deben , put it so eloquently , major social changes do not happen when the majority align themselves ; they have almost always happened when a minority has stood up for what it believes to be right , put it to the public and in the end proved that it is right . unfortunately , some who profess to believe in equal rights for everyone , regardless of gender , race and sexual orientation , find it difficult fully to escape prejudices ingrained over many years when homosexuality was said to be at worst an abomination , or at least something to be very quiet and discreet about because it bordered on the shameful . to noble lords who are finding the idea of same-sex marriage difficult to come to terms with , i make a plea that they should listen to their heart and indulge their generosity of spirit . having heard the deeply personal speeches of the noble lords , lord browne and lord smith , my noble friends lord alli and lord collins , the noble lord , lord black of brentwood , the noble baroness , lady barker , and the noble lord , lord carlile , it would be hard not to be moved - and it would be very hard-hearted not to support same-sex marriage . the noble lord , lord faulks , asked me a direct question : would my government have brought in this legislation ? given that we brought forward all the equalities legislation between 1997 and 2010 , and given the presence of my noble friend lord alli over my shoulder , how could i say otherwise ? it is the personal testimony not just of noble lords who have faced discrimination and struggle because of their same-sex relationships , but of all noble lords who have spoken of the love and strength they have found through their partners , civil partners , husbands and wives , that should secure our resolve to reject the amendment of the noble lord , lord dear , and proceed with the bill . i speak of my noble friends lady royall , lord brooke of alverthorpe , lord young of norwood green and many others . for many , marriage is the glue - my noble friend lady mallalieu called it the superglue - that binds together relationships and gives those in them the strength to face life 's challenges . to have the opportunity to extend this privilege to all couples who want to make that commitment is something that we must now embrace and celebrate as a means to a stronger and more loving society . i look forward to the bill receiving a second reading today and to getting on with the committee stage , where i hope we will make progress with many of the issues raised by my colleagues and by noble lords across the house . we on these benches will look at pension rights , transgender couples , about which my noble friend lady gould spoke so passionately , and humanist marriages , which were referred to by the noble lord , lord birt , and which we are keen to see introduced . therefore , i urge the house to vote against the amendment of the noble lord , lord dear , and to see the bill through to its next stage . for the sake of clarity , if noble lords support the continued passage of the bill , the lobby to go into is the not-content , and i look forward to seeing many of them there .  my lords , i am grateful to all noble lords who have spoken in the debate , and to the noble baroness , lady thornton , for her support . we have had a comprehensive debate that has shown how this house takes its role seriously and is able to deal with controversial and sensitive issues in a measured way that respects differing views . what has come across strongly is that those who support the bill and those who oppose it essentially agree on one crucial matter : the importance of marriage . we all agree that marriage is a cornerstone of our society that provides stability and brings families and communities together . it will not be possible for me to refer to all noble lords who have spoken in the debate , or to respond to all the points raised . i hope that noble lords will forgive me for that . however , some key themes have emerged , and i will deal with those . a number of noble lords , particularly the noble lord , lord dear , questioned whether the process that had been followed for the bill was right . my party was clear about its wish to consider the case of same-sex marriage in a contract for equalities , published alongside our election manifesto . the coalition agreement set out the government 's commitment to push for , " unequivocal support for gay rights " . we have conducted the process of developing our proposals in a completely transparent way . we carried out the country 's largest ever public consultation , and every response and petition was accounted for and considered with the utmost care . i say to noble lords who raised questions about petitions that these were not ignored . they were all treated equally , commented on and flagged in the government 's response to the consultation . some noble lords questioned whether the bill had had proper scrutiny in the other place . convention tells us that it is not for this house to comment on how the other house conducts its business . however , it is worth noting that the committee stage there was completed with half a day to spare . the bill had two days of debate on report on the floor of the house , and was passed by a majority of two to one at second and third readings . as many noble lords argued , it is now for this house to scrutinise the bill in detail . moving on from process , some noble lords queried the robustness of the religious protections , including the quadruple lock , whereby no religious organisation or individual minister can be compelled to conduct a same-sex marriage ; all will be free to refuse to do so . i say , first , that i am very grateful to the most reverend primate and the right reverend prelate the bishop of leicester for their acknowledgement of the work that the government have done to ensure that the religious protections in the bill are effective . the noble lord , lord pannick , and the noble baroness , lady kennedy , were very clear in their contributions about their view of the robustness of these religious protections . however , it is only right , because in my opening remarks i did not address some of the specific points that were raised by noble lords in debate , that i should now do so . the concern was raised that the european court of human rights might order the government to require religious organisations to marry same-sex couples according to their rites , in opposition to their religious doctrines . to suggest that this could happen is to rely on a combination of three highly improbable conclusions . first , the court would need to go against its own clear precedent that states are not required by the european convention on human rights to provide marriage for same-sex couples , and that they have a wide discretion in this area . secondly , the court would need to decide that the interests of a same-sex couple who wanted a particular religious organisation to marry them according to their rites outweighed the rights and beliefs of an entire faith and its members as a whole . thirdly , the court would need to discount the importance of article 9 of its own convention , which guarantees freedom of thought , conscience and religion . it would be rewriting the rules not just for one religious organisation in england and wales but for all religious organisations in all 47 states of the council of europe . some noble lords raised concerns that the bill does not deliver equality . indeed , they suggested that it creates new inequalities and argued that it redefines marriage because same-sex couples cannot procreate . i will return to the definition of marriage after dealing with some of the specific examples that were raised in this part of our discussion . the current definition of adultery has been developed in case law and does not cover relations between members of the same sex . at present , a married man who has a sexual relationship with another man is not committing adultery . that would be the case only if he had sexual intercourse outside marriage with a woman . the bill retains this definition . like existing marriages , a same-sex marriage can be ended by divorce on the grounds of unreasonable behaviour in such circumstances . as for consummation , that is not necessary for any marriage to be lawful and indeed not possible in some , which is why we allow for death-bed marriages . as consummation is a historical definition associated with procreation , it would not make sense to extend this concept to same-sex marriages and there is no need to do so . if for no other reason , the opportunity for noble lords to debate these sorts of things in greater detail is a good reason for this bill to get more scrutiny . i am sure that they will not be able to resist debating all this in great detail . the noble lord , lord tebbit , asked about the law of succession and its interaction with the bill , and in particular whether a monarch in a same-sex marriage could succeed to the throne and whether his or her child , or the child of his or her partner , could succeed . the answer is that the bill does not change anything in relation to the law of succession . only the natural-born child of a husband and wife is entitled to succeed to the throne - not adopted children , children born as a result of artificial insemination or children born to only one party to a relationship . that is the position now and it will remain the case .  it is discriminatory now and we are not changing anything . some noble lords expressed concern about the bill 's impact on freedom of expression and freedom of conscience . particular reference was made to whether teachers would be forced to promote same-sex marriage and be dismissed if they criticise it , whether employees will be barred from criticising same-sex marriage and whether registrars will have any choice but to conduct such marriages . the position of teachers has been the subject of a lot of debate and scrutiny already in the other house . my right honourable friend michael gove , the secretary of state for education , who would like to think that he has the word " standards " stamped through him like a stick of rock , was clear in the evidence that he gave to the public bill committee that there is a significant difference between a teacher explaining an issue and promoting or endorsing it . no teacher will be forced to promote or endorse same-sex marriage . any teacher will continue to be able to state their own belief or that of their faith about same-sex marriage . however , teachers and schools will be expected to make clear as a matter of fact in teaching about marriage that the law in england and wales enables same-sex couples to marry . we do not consider that the bill changes anything in this area and we are clear that the existing protections for teachers are sound . as i said yesterday , though , we are continuing to listen to , and discuss these concerns with , religious groups and others to ensure that we have done all we can to make those protections clear . as for changing the bill to ensure that employees cannot be dismissed or disciplined for criticising same-sex marriage , we do not consider that there is any need to do so . indeed , there could be harm in making such an amendment by raising doubt in other areas , such as criticising homosexuality or civil partnerships . it is lawful to express a belief that marriage should be between a man and a woman , and it is lawful to do that whether at work or outside work . that is a belief that is protected under the religion or belief provisions of the equality act 2010 , and penalising someone because of such a belief would be unlawful discrimination under that act . this will still be the position once the bill is enacted . none the less , we have been considering what steps we can take to ensure that employers , and particularly public bodies , are completely clear about their responsibilities to respect the rights of people who believe that marriage should be between a man and a woman . with that in mind , the equality and human rights commission will be reviewing relevant guidance and statutory codes of practice to ensure that the position is completely clear . on registrars , the government remain of the view that public servants with statutory duties should not be able to exempt themselves from providing their services for same-sex couples . regarding the government 's position on this important issue of same-sex marriage , at the moment those of us who love someone of the opposite sex can get married , and those of us who love someone of the same sex can be civilly partnered . in legal terms , there is little difference except in the way they are formed and the way they can be dissolved if that sadly becomes necessary . yesterday i explained why marriage is important to us as a society . others referred to it as a social good . we all agreed that the institution , the enterprise , the endeavour or whichever word we think best to describe it is a good thing , and that it is important . some noble lords , including the right reverend prelates on the bishops ' bench , my noble friend lady cumberlege and others , have suggested that gay couples should have their own institution separate from marriage . my noble and learned friend lord mackay of clashfern repeated that today , and made clear that he believes so on the grounds of procreation . on the question of a separate institution , gay men and women already have their own institution called civil partnership . like the bill , the arrival of civil partnerships was a huge change . unlike the bill , which has 19 clauses , the civil partnership act had 200 clauses and was contested strongly in debate in your lordships ' house . after it was finally passed , same-sex couples had access to equal legal rights but they remained different . marriage remained the preserve of couples made up of one man and one woman . it is the success of civil partnerships that has driven greater acceptance of same-sex couples . in an amazingly short space of time we hear people , including those who used to oppose them , say , " we can 't believe we were all so concerned at the time " . civil partnerships have led many people - indeed , the majority - to say , " do you know what ? if civil partnership is marriage in all but name , why can 't gay men and lesbian women get married , if that 's what they want to do ? " . another institution just for gay couples , as suggested by several noble lords , is not going to make the demand for them to be able to get married go away . another institution just for gay couples will not address the fundamental purposes at the heart of this bill : the acceptance of gay , lesbian , bisexual and transgender people for who they are , and the preservation of marriage itself as a vital institution to our society . in his powerful contribution , my noble friend lord black said that legislation drives social change , and up to now the civil partnership act has been the best example of that . as some noble lords pointed out during the debate , positive social change , when it favours minority groups , is not by definition about numbers . in 2010 the government made a commitment to push forward unequivocally for gay rights in the coalition agreement . the fact that three years later we are legislating for same-sex marriage reflects the accelerating acceptance of same-sex couples and the possibility that change is possible . the bill does not change the religious doctrine or beliefs of any religious organisation that does not want to change them . the bill protects and promotes religious freedom . outside of religion , though , gay couples want to marry and many straight couples want them to be able to . the majority of people are ready to open the door to marriage and to welcome those who want to commit publicly to their partner , because they see that they want to do so for all the same reasons as them . the right reverend prelate the bishop of leicester asked yesterday , " do the gains of meeting the need of many lgbt people for the dignity and equality that identifying their partnerships as marriage gives outweigh the loss entailed as society moves away from a clear understanding of marriage as a desirable setting within which children are conceived and raised ? " . - [official report , 3/6/13 ; col . 962 .] that may be a legitimate question for the church to ask itself when or if it ever considers whether to allow same-sex couples to marry . however , i would argue that , outside the church , people already understand that two gay men or two lesbian women marrying each other is the same as a man marrying a woman . they have accepted that it is okay for same-sex couples to marry and that them doing so will not redefine their own marriage , because they understand that gay men and women decide to enter a civil partnership for the same reason that a straight couple decide to marry . same sex couples and opposite sex couples are different physically , but that which leads them to want the same is not different . i urge this house to ensure that the protections that allow the church and other faiths to maintain their very legitimate belief in marriage being only between a man and a woman work properly . this house should also debate and scrutinise whether the bill protects freedom of speech and freedom of expression ; that is what we really need to ensure is the case . we need religious belief in marriage to sit comfortably alongside what the state allows in law , just as we already do for divorce , contraception and abortion . it is possible for us to allow something in law that not everyone agrees with and to respect our differences of view . the bill , which allows same sex couples to marry , is , as i said at the very start of the debate yesterday , also about protecting and promoting religious freedom . i say again that , if further changes are necessary to make those protections clearer , the government will consider doing so . there have been many powerful speeches but i hope that noble lords will forgive me , and that my noble friend lord jenkin will not be embarrassed , if i say that i thought that his was one of the best . he said better than i ever could that this bill will not redefine marriage because it will not redefine his own of 60 years , which has provided mutual comfort and support . over the past two days , we have heard lots of views about what marriage means and we have all expressed ourselves differently , but we all unite on three points of principle : marriage is a serious commitment between two people ; we think that the institution itself is vital to our society ; and we respect and must protect religious freedom and freedom of speech . the bill supports all three principles . i hope that your lordships ' house , building on its tradition of supporting social change , will wish to affirm that the bill should have its second reading here . i urge noble lords who support the bill , and those who remain unsure and so want it to be scrutinised in detail before they decide , not to accept the amendment moved by the noble lord , lord dear . if the noble lord calls a division , i urge all noble lords to vote not content .  my lords , when i came into the chamber this afternoon , it never occurred to me that there might be something original to be said . having listened , however , to all the speeches thus far , it seems to me that it is original to point out that the very purpose of this bill - its underlying objective - is inclusivity ; it is sameness ; it is to eliminate , so far as possible , any differentiation in regard and in treatment of same-sex couples from heterosexual couples . it is to give same-sex couples the exact same status , benefits , comfort , joys , estimation , reputation - call it what one will - of marriage . the bill is so called and the explanatory notes make that plain . with the greatest respect to those who move and support these amendments , they are calculated , if not indeed designed , essentially to undermine that core purpose of the legislation . in truth , this is a root-and-branch attack on the bill , almost in the same way as was advanced at second reading . i , too , regret i was unable to speak at second reading - i was in fact celebrating my own golden wedding . i am happy to say that my noble and learned friend lord lloyd of berwick was among those who joined me in the celebration . he says today that to talk of civil unions , instead of using the language of marriage would be , and i think i quote him accurately , " to give the gay community what it so obviously desires " . with the best will in the world , it would not . they have civil partnerships . it is absurd to suggest , i would argue , that civil partnerships and civil unions are distinct .  i , of course , need the most rudimentary lectures in any scientific subject you care to mention , but i appreciate - and it was said time and again at second reading - that there is a distinction between equality and sameness . however , that is no bar to giving the gay community - same-sex couples - the same term to celebrate and enshrine their faith in and commitment to each other . if the bill goes through in its present form and those couples are henceforth asked , " are you married ? " , they will be able to say yes , but if the amendments that are now suggested go through , they will still have to say no , and i for one would regret that .  my lords , i find myself in total agreement with the submissions made so clearly by the noble and learned lord , lord brown of eaton-under-heywood . i have immense respect for and sympathy with those who stand firmly on each side of this argument . if it is proven that there can be no actual sameness in single-sex and dual-sex marriage , then on a very artificial basis the argument seems to be carried that way . there cannot be total sameness , and we all know that . however , the question that we should humbly be asking ourselves this afternoon is : can there be so much in common that the idea of marriage can accommodate both in respect and in status ? that , i think , is the real question . if the argument was that the christian concept of marriage is now and always has been immutable , unchangeable and utterly the same from generation to generation , then my case would fail . however , is that in fact the case ? prior to 1836 , people could get married in this country only in the church of england . my forebears were staunch welsh presbyterians but they had to submit to a ceremony that they regarded as wrong . was that not a massive change in so far as the institution of marriage was concerned in 1836 ? i am sorry to pontificate about matters that are well known to many distinguished lawyers in this house but before 1882 and the married women's property act of that year , a married woman could not hold substantial property in her own name . she could hold what i think was called her " paraphernalia " but other property became the property of her husband and she herself was essentially a chattel of her husband's estate . immediately after that act of 1882 , could anybody say that marriage had not changed at all , any more than one could say it after 1836 ? then , in 1925 , the criminal law was substantially changed . previous to that point , if a married woman was present when an offence was committed by her husband , there was a clear presumption - a rebuttable presumption , it is true - that she was acting under his dominion and under his orders . would one not say that that substantially changed the situation of marriage in the criminal law ?  ultimately , bearing in mind the whole ethos of society , it is a matter of judgment , whether the totality of these changes has substantially altered the institution of marriage . prior to 1991 a husband could rape his wife provided they were still living together and no separation order had been made by a court . was her position the same after 1991 as it was previously ? one could give other less spectacular instances .  that is absolutely true . that is the assumption made in the book of common prayer , which , as i understand it - i am a welsh presbyterian - says that there are three justifications for marriage . the first is the procreation of children , the second is the avoidance of the temptations of fornication and adultery , and the third is that there should be a lifelong relationship based on love , affection and respect . the first justification has been dealt with very properly by the noble lord , lord phillips of sudbury . many people who are young and capable of procreating children now get married on the understanding that there will be no children in their relationship . does one say that their union is less than a union of marriage ? on the third point , about the creation of a lifelong union based on love , affection , respect and mutual dedication , is there a fundamental difference between that and the institution of marriage , as we say now ? nothing that i have said can prove the matter one way or the other . however , i make the obvious point that marriage is not an immutable institution . it has become elongated and greatly changed over the years , and will be changed again . is it not possible to accommodate within that change the term " marriage " for people of the same sex ? i make one last point with regard to union . the noble lord , lord hylton , said that there was a union of scotland , england and wales . it was never a union in relation to wales , as i am the noble lord , lord elis-thomas , will agree . the preface to the act of union says the country , dominion and principality of wales is now and always has been annexed , incorporated and included . it was a rape - certainly not a union .  my lords , i was not at the second reading debate but i have read the 90 speeches since then . i am glad i was not there because i would have added even more to the length of the debates . i declare an interest : i am neither a believing christian nor a believing jew , and that no doubt colours the way in which i approach these matters . many of those who have spoken already come from a strong religious tradition , which i fully respect , and which drives many of their views . as the noble and learned lord , lord brown , has said , the main purpose of the bill is to enable same-sex couples to marry , either in a civil ceremony or , provided that the religious organisation concerned is in agreement , on religious premises with the marriage being solemnised through a religious ceremony . i promise to speak only once in relation to amendments 7 , 8 , 9 , 34 and 46 . all are based on the idea that there is something called " traditional marriage " , defined as the union of one man and one woman for life to the exclusion of all others . what they mean by " traditional marriage " - as the noble lord , lord elystan-morgan , indicated in referring to the book of common prayer - is a form of marriage that is biblically ordained in the judeo-christian tradition , which is a theistic tradition , although it does not represent the thinking of many christians or jews or many of those of no religious belief who are not affronted by the notion of same-sex marriage . under the bill , christian churches , orthodox jews , sikhs and muslims are well protected from the risk of liability . however , that does not satisfy the movers of these amendments , who seek to write into the statute book a lesser status for same-sex marriage than for opposite-sex marriage by calling it " civil union " or some other term .  no , i will not , because i think all noble lords in this chamber regard marriage as the crowning of our relationships . as a man who has been married for 41 years , i certainly do , as do many gay people who are religious , or not religious but who regard marriage as the highest status they can aspire to . therefore if you call it something less , such as civil partnership or civil union , it has a lesser status - not just a different status but a lesser one .  i will do my best . as the noble lord , lord elystan-morgan , has said , concepts of marriage have not been static in england or elsewhere . during the past three centuries , parliament has made changes to the status of marriage . what was once traditional and discriminatory is no longer enshrined in english marriage law . the bill is a further step in removing unjustifiable discrimination , not against catholics , protestant dissenters or jews , but against homosexuals . i think my noble friend lady williams will concede that gay and lesbian couples are just as able as heterosexual couples to love each other in long , enduring relationships . they are just as able to bring up children in the way good parents do , in lifelong relationships . some noble lords will have personal experience of their children in gay and lesbian relationships doing precisely that . traditionally , the law governing the registration of marriages was piecemeal , restrictive and discriminatory , beginning with the act of uniformity 1662 and lord hardwicke's marriage act 1753 , which abolished common-law marriages . in the 19th century , parliament created exceptions , one by one , to that discrimination . most recently , exceptions were made under the places of worship registration act 1855 , not only for protestant and jewish dissenters but for other denominations and bodies , theistic and non-theistic , including buddhists , jains and muslims , whose premises are registered for religious worship and the solemnisation of marriages . under scots law , as the noble and learned lord , lord mackay , knows well , marriages by cohabitation and repute could be contracted in scotland until as recently as 2006 . they were still regarded as marriages , even though they were irregular . a traditional marriage could also include a marriage between first cousins , an arranged marriage or a strange thing called a levirate marriage . until the civil partnership act 2004 , loving gay and lesbian couples could not get legal recognition for their enduring relationship . now , they may do so . the act has worked very well , even though it was strongly opposed at the time . however , even though the civil partnerships act gives them equivalent rights and duties to those of married couples , it forbids them from marrying and the words " civil union " add nothing to the notion of civil partnership . that is why it is a lesser concept . a year before the civil partnership act became law , there was an important case - which many of your lordships will have heard of - goodridge v department of public health , in which the chief justice of the supreme judicial court of massachusetts , margaret marshall , presided . that court upheld the right to gay and lesbian marriage , rejecting the argument that some of your lordships have made today and elsewhere , that civil union or civil partnership was good enough . the chief justice explained why , on grounds of due process and equal protection , the state did not have a rational basis for denying same-sex couples marriage . a majority of that court agreed that same-sex couples must not be assigned second-class status , which is what i suggest would be accomplished if any of these amendments were accepted . the other place has formed a similar view about the need for same-sex couples to marry , as have the government . i know of no judgment of our courts or of the european court of justice that suggests the need for amendments of this character . they would suffer from the serious vice of encouraging a belief in a need for a second-class status for same-sex couples to be enshrined in english law . if the house divides now or hereafter , i will have to vote against any of them .  i have already explained my position , which is the same as the judgment i just referred to : that when it comes to marriage , gay and lesbian couples are entitled to total equality to that of opposite-sex couples .  my lords , i strongly support what the noble and learned lord , lord brown of eaton-under-heywood , said . he crystallised exactly what the debate about this group of amendments is about . the rationale behind this bill , the philosophy that underpins it , is the concept of equality of marriage . without wishing to go over the same old ground that to a large degree we went over at second reading , the point is that gay people simply want the right to share in the same institutions , not the same institutions that are qualified in some way or another . with due respect to those who say that there is not much in it , there is a great deal in a name and it is much more than a matter of nomenclature , which i think is the phrase the noble lord , lord phillips of sudbury , referred to . words such as " union " and " espousal " will themselves turn rapidly into divisive terms . if i fill out one of those forms at a bank or somewhere else and they say : " are you married ? " , and i have to say : " no , i am espoused " , i shall feel in exactly the same state i was in under the existing law of civil partnerships . therefore we do not want simply to replace one second-division label with another . i think that the noble lord , lord phillips , was the first to raise the issue of esteem . i have to tell noble lords that the issue of esteem and the use of the word " marriage " , unqualified by anything else , are inextricably linked . i spoke in the debate two weeks ago . other noble lords talked about the postbags that they had had since then . i have had a very substantial postbag - more so than when i have talked here on other matters - from people who looked at the house and thought very well of our proceedings . a number of people wrote to say that we gave them the courage to come out . that is a remarkable thing . however , this amendment flies in the face of all that . it is a wolf of an amendment in sheep's clothing . it strikes at the heart of the bill and would go against the entire philosophy on which it is rightly based , which is full , unqualified equality for gay people .  my lords , it is my understanding that what same-sex couples are asking for is not permission from the state to enter into loving , committed , lifelong relationships but the recognition by the state that the relationships they have entered into , or will enter into , are equally valid in bringing stability to society and in being a right and proper place for the upbringing of the children they take into their families . therefore , anything other than marriage , which we have all said is the bedrock of our society and should be the basis for the ongoing upbringing of children , will not do .  my lords , i feel deeply unhappy to be divided on this matter from so many of my traditional friends on these benches , but divided i am . many of these amendments seem to rely on an understanding of the word " marriage " . in many of them we get down to defining the term . a " traditional marriage " is said to be , " the voluntary union of one man and one woman for life , to the exclusion of all others " . that is stated in several of the amendments that we are discussing . we need to look at definition to see what it means . i will start with , " to the exclusion of all others " . surely the bar is set too high for most mortals , including even the clergy and - dare i say it ? - royal princes . the failure to keep to such a high trajectory does not destroy the meaning of marriage , and should not destroy the purpose of the bill . we are told that traditional marriage should be for life . again , sadly , this is not so . we do our best . we promise and intend to be married for ever , but divorce is no longer a matter of public shame , although i hope it is a matter of much private regret . therefore , all that seems to be left of the definition is that marriage should be between a man and a woman . traditionally that has been indisputably true . how could it have been otherwise ? until very recently , homosexuality was punished by the full force of the law : incarceration , a criminal record , chemical castration in many cases , and almost total social exclusion . of course marriage traditionally was between a man and a woman . however , the definition does not hold water . there is no satisfactory definition in the amendments of traditional marriage . going back in time , we find that marriage was about inheritance , power , social standing and securing property rights . those with no power or little social standing did it to make it easier to have sex - let us be honest . it is only in our lifetimes that marriage has been broadly based on love and any sense of equality between a man and a woman . even today , there are still many exceptions to that rule . marriage has always changed its foundations . it evolves and will continue to do so . i have considerable sympathy for many of the values that lie behind the amendments . for instance , we have all suffered for too long from the intolerance exemplified in political correctness . however , with the greatest respect to many of my colleagues , we cannot base a piece of legislation on a concept of traditional marriage that has no enforceable meaning .  is the noble lord aware that the government have tabled an amendment to deal with his precise point about free speech to make it clear that criticising same-sex marriage or otherwise will not in any way constitute a criminal offence ? that is clearly spelt out in a later amendment .  i thank the noble lord . i wanted to make a very brief intervention to bring your lordships back to the discussion of amendment 1 in the name of the noble lord , lord hylton . it seems to me that that amendment cuts at the very heart of the bill , for which we have already voted . clause 1(1) states : " marriage of same sex couples is lawful " . in other words , we are talking about the basis of the bill that we have discussed and was voted for by a very large majority in both houses . the amendment seeks to replace " marriage " with " union " , which then makes something quite different from what the bill is all about . in my view , it is not an amendment at all , because a union of same-sex couples , as i understand it , is lawful anyway . what we are talking about here is legislation for same-sex marriage , and amending that sentence in clause 1(1) as proposed cuts at the very root of the legislation . that cannot be acceptable . if it were pressed , i certainly would not vote for " marriage " to be replaced by some other word . in fact , i cannot think of a word that would be at all suitable , because marriage is what we are talking about - marriage between same-sex couples , which we have already agreed in principle with a very large vote at second reading . i certainly do not want to repeat a second reading speech , although one could say quite a lot about traditional marriage because that also has been referred to in the debate . as far as i am concerned , the wording that was before us as concerns traditional marriage is very much based on a religious outlook , which i respect but do not share ; and certainly it has a provision for a kind of opposition to divorce , which i do not share . of course , i imagine that very many people in this house at some time have been in a divorce court and therefore would not qualify under the traditional marriage position outlined in some of the amendments before this house . the main point that i want to make is that i do not see how amendment 1 , in the name of the noble lord , lord hylton , can possibly be accepted because it cuts at the very root of this bill , for which we have already voted . we have had our second reading debate and have already voted in this house and in the other house with a very large majority , so i do not see how that can possibly be an acceptable amendment .  my lords , i would like to explain why i am against this group of amendments and why i support this bill . i first declare an interest as a practising solicitor specialising in family matters , as a trustee of the marriage foundation - although i speak in a personal capacity and not on behalf of it - and as a person who has had only a civil marriage ceremony . a cynic may think that i am in favour of this bill because it opens up another avenue of possible work for me , but the reason that i support it is precisely because i believe the reverse to be true . civil partnerships became legal in 2005 . seven years later , i am now dealing with a wave of cases for their dissolution , although i stress that they are no more prone to dissolution than marriages . i ask myself : would these partnerships have stood a greater chance of success had the parties been able to be married ? if this could happen , i believe that there would certainly be no adverse consequences , and there may possibly be some positive ones . the civil partnerships to which i refer often involve children of the union . it is , of course , the children who are the innocent victims of the breakdown of a partnership , however that partnership is described . it is my belief that every possible measure should be taken by this country to support commitment to stable relationships . their breakdown and the fall-out for all concerned , financial and emotional , must be addressed because that is the real threat to the very fabric of our society .  the law in relation to breakdown of marriage has evolved fast during the 30 or so years during which i have been in practice . for example , when i started , prenuptial contracts were of little or no value . it was considered repugnant to public policy to contemplate the breakdown of a contract that is meant to be for life . a few years ago , the supreme court decided that there had to be very good reasons not to hold a man or woman to their bargain regulating the terms of the demise of their marriage , just as in any other contract - thereby , in effect , substantially upholding such contracts . marriage is clearly not for life . that is illustrated by the status of second marriages . nobody questions the validity of the second marriage of a heterosexual couple , yet a homosexual marriage is not entitled even to a first chance . what would humpty dumpty call a second marriage ? would he call it a " union " or a " second attempt " ? it is fanciful to think that if marriage is for life a second marriage should be given status , when a homosexual marriage is not given a chance . religious institutions should not be forced or coerced to perform rituals that are not within their beliefs , and the bill is clear on this point . my husband and i do not share a common faith and were therefore joined in a civil service , like many others . no one questions the validity of our marriage . i have listened to many of the arguments for and against allowing the bill to proceed , but when i hear the pleas of those who wish to sign up to the commitment of marriage it is impossible to see why an obstacle should be put in their way and the description of a union as marriage should be permitted to apply only to heterosexual couples , particularly given the status of the institution enjoyed by them . everything should be done to support the commitment that two people wish to make to each other . to do otherwise is discrimination , pure and simple . the consequence of the bill not proceeding - and that is what the amendments before us would effect - would be this country being behind others in this area . same-sex couples will have to go abroad to get married and there will be all sorts of complications as to the status in this country of such foreign marriages . we should embrace anything that encourages commitments to lasting , stable and loving partnerships , however they are described . their demise and resulting fallout is causing serious problems for our society , and that is where our focus should be , not on the label given to their inception . in summary , anything that has or could encourage the commitment of partners to each other , for their children , for life and for society in general , should be applauded . i am therefore in favour of the bill .  my lords , i strongly support the speech of the noble baroness , lady shackleton , and will be very brief . i remember going to a wedding of a couple of men shortly after the civil partnership act came into effect in 2005 . it was regarded by most of us at the party following that event , including by myself , as a form of marriage , and was referred to as such on that occasion . i cannot remember any words such as " partnership " or " union " for that relationship when it was discussed . the natural description of the joining of a couple , whether of the same sex or different sexes , is surely " marriage " . that is the appropriate word in the bill . i conclude by mentioning the word " matrimony " , which has been referred to already and appears in the bill . it is a word that means " mothership " and adopts the latin word " mater " . the use to which " matrimony " has been put in the bill cannot apply .  my lords , normally i agree with everything my noble friend lord higgins says . i am in profound disagreement with him today . he has emphasised that he believes that marriages between same-sex couples and heterosexual couples are different . there are all kinds of marriages that are different : marriages between divorced people ; marriages with and without children ; death-bed marriages . however , we do not find different terms for those . noble lords need to ask themselves serious questions about why they wish to continue to emphasise sexual orientation in the names that they give certain statuses . by perpetuating giving a different name to marriage in the context of gay and lesbian people , we are wishing to continue to regard them as different from us . inclusion is what this bill is about , and what we should be about in society generally , because that is what will make us a stronger society .  my lords , without wishing to prolong this debate , perhaps i may try to say a brief word on behalf of children . many gay relationships - civil partnerships - have children within them . if anybody believes that within a gay relationship it is simple to create a family , they should think again and talk to some of those families . for both gay women and , perhaps more particularly , for gay men , having children by adoption is a most formidable task and one that is scrutinised with great care . what we are talking about here is not just the equality of the married couple or the partners to that relationship , but of their children as well . i would urge upon your lordships that we should enable those parents to say to their children , " we are married " , and above all we should enable those children , when they are asked about the relationship of their parents , to say , " my parents are married " , not " my parents are espoused " or " my parents are unionised " -   i thought that might draw a guffaw from the labour side of the house ; they know the dangers of it . instead of that or any other constructed euphemism , those children should be able to say , " my parents are married " , just as other children can .  if that was the definition , would the church of england be prepared to marry couples in church ? the great difficulty with civil partnership marriages for christians - those who love the lord deeply - is that there is no religious content . from the speeches just made , would the church of england change its position if the amendment of the noble and learned lord , lord mackay , was agreed ?  i should like to ask the noble and learned baroness a question . i have wanted to ask this of other members of your lordships' house who were speaking about the matter of calling a same-sex marriage a same-sex marriage rather than distinguishing it from what people are calling a traditional marriage . what is the noble and learned baroness's view about the fact that anyone who has a same-sex marriage would have to identify their sexuality by definition ? why should they have to do that ?  i beg the noble and learned baroness's pardon , but in other parts of our legislation - in our equalities law - we protect people from having to declare their sexuality , because we think that that is the right thing to do . it is not a question of the truth or not the truth .  i apologise to the noble and learned baroness , but i never answered her question when i was on my feet . she asked what i thought of amendment 2 . what i do not understand , either in amendment 2 or in the speeches in support of it , is why it is necessary . the bill begins by saying in clause 1(1) : " marriage of same sex couples is lawful " . subsection (2) refers to : " the marriage of a same sex couple " . we do not need to have sarcastic remarks about lewis carroll and humpty dumpty . the words could not be clearer . i do not understand why one needs to add anything . the bill is about the marriage of same-sex couples and nothing else .  my lords , i rise to speak against amendment 1 . i will also touch on amendments 2 , 9 , 33 , 34 , 46 and 57 . the clear purpose of the bill is to allow same-sex couples to marry . these amendments seek , in one way or another , to create two classes of marriage , which is exactly what the bill is avoiding . this occurs in the amendment of the noble lords , lord hylton and lord cormack , which replaces " marriage " with " union " ; and in the amendment of the noble and learned lord , lord mackay of clashfern , by adding " marriage (same sex couples) " . let me say to the noble and learned lord that he did not do his cause justice by linking the abuse of children to a speech about same-sex marriage . many of us found that absolutely offensive .  the noble and learned lord should not have said it then . the amendment of the noble lord , lord dear , and those of the noble lords , lord edmiston and lord mawhinney , and the noble and right reverend lord , lord carey , have opted for the term " traditional marriage " . in fact the noble lord , lord dear , and the noble and right reverend lord , lord carey , want a separate register too .  i thank the noble and right reverend lord for that intervention . i had heard that he had withdrawn his name from the amendment . i think he described it as mischievous and dangerous and i very much agree with that , too . the noble lord , lord armstrong of ilminster , wants to use the term " matrimonial marriage " for opposite sex-marriage . all these amendments are cut from the same cloth with the same purpose : to create inequality in the use of the term marriage between same-sex couples and opposite-sex couples . i agree with the noble lord , lord black of brentwood , that these amendments are wolves in sheep's clothing , designed to preserve marriage and the use of the term exclusively for opposite-sex couples , with the exception of the amendment of the noble lord , lord dear , which seeks to introduce a new concept of traditional marriage .  i do not accept the noble lord's premise . i understand that there is concern outside this chamber , but the vast majority of people in this country want this measure to go through . poll after poll , the majority in the other place and , i suspect , the majority here want it . the problem with the noble lord's suggestion is that it is diametrically opposed to what we wish for in terms of the use of the word marriage . i am a little confused about what the noble lord , lord dear , has in mind when talking about traditional marriage . marriage not just predates christianity , but is found in many different cultures and traditions and , as has been said , in many different forms . as an aside , the noble lord may be interested to know that in ancient rome , emperor nero was married to a man - a fine tradition , in my view , but perhaps not what the noble lord had in mind .  my lords , i think i am right - i hope that the noble and right reverend lord , lord carey , will correct me if i am wrong - that in an e-mail purporting to come from the noble and right reverend lord , he described his own amendment as mischievous and dangerous . it was not i who used those words . attempts to create inequality in the bill seem to be the sole object of these amendments . to create a separate term or register would be both divisive and unnecessary . i hope that noble lords will think again and not press their amendments . i suspect that there is no appetite for them in the house .  i will repeat what i said to the noble lord , lord cormack . these two concepts are diametrically opposed . what the noble lord wishes to happen is completely opposite to what i wish to happen . at some point , when two sets of rights are in conflict , these great houses of parliament have to decide which rights are pre-eminent . if there was a course of action that we could find that would satisfy and accommodate everybody , there is nobody in the house , on any side of the argument , who would not work night and day to find it . however , these concepts are opposed . therefore , our job as a parliament is to say which is pre-eminent , the first or the second . i suspect that the public and members of this house -  amendment 9 , tabled by the noble lord , lord dear , would create a separate register - so there is a difference in the noble lord's amendment , which would create a new category of marriage . more broadly on the noble lord's point , i contend that we have to consider the emotional response of the communities involved . the issue cannot be gauged simply by the words in the act . i argue very strongly that it is not acceptable to have a differentiation in wording or name between different types of marriage . that would be exacerbated outside this chamber the moment the legislation went through .  my lords , i had not intended to intervene in this debate , but i will make two brief points . first , i am very uncomfortable with the references we have heard to a new definition of marriage . as i understand it , the aim of the bill is to enable same-sex couples to share in the existing understanding and status of marriage . my understanding of my marriage is not primarily gender-based ; it is based on the fact that i love my wife and wish to stay with her for the rest of my life . that has nothing to do with gender . secondly , i would love to find a compromise - i am a compromising sort of person , and i very much welcome the recognition of my noble and learned friend lady butler-sloss that the word " marriage " is essential in whatever we end up with - but i find it extremely hard to imagine any compromise that would not formalise the idea that there are two different forms of marriage . therefore , i tend to agree with the noble lord , lord alli , that it is either one thing or the other .  my lords , we have had a long and interesting debate about the definition of marriage and about this group of amendments . i accept fully that noble lords are , with the best of intentions , trying to find a way through . however , we on these benches think that the effect of all the amendments in this group would be the same . all , in different ways , seek to enshrine in law a distinction between what is referred to as " traditional marriage " or " matrimonial marriage " and the new , statutory definition of marriage that will be created under the bill , which encompasses the union of both opposite-sex and same-sex couples . whether those who tabled the amendments intended to or not , they were in effect making two classes of marriage . trying to find different definitions - and in some cases , i fear , jealously guarding the word " marriage " for heterosexual couples - suggests that one form of marriage is inferior to another and that flies in the face of the bill . the noble and learned lord , lord brown of eaton-under-heywood , was quite right in his remarks , as were other noble lords , including the noble lords , lord dobbs and lord black , the noble baroness , lady richardson , my noble friend lady turner , the noble baroness , lady shackleton , in her excellent speech , the noble baroness , lady noakes , and the noble lord , lord carlile . they all appreciated that while those who tabled the amendments have a strong personal belief about marriage , in some cases rooted in their religious faith , their amendments would undermine the purpose of the bill . it is important to make a distinction between something that has the effect of undermining a belief or an idea and something that undermines an individual's ability to hold such a belief . i find it difficult to believe that , when the bill becomes an act and same-sex marriages are a routine matter , as they will be , the noble lords who have been so nervous today will feel that something important or precious has been removed from their faith or their strong belief in marriage . article 9 of the convention on human rights clearly enshrines an individual's right to freedom of thought , conscience and religion . we must be absolutely clear in our protection of these rights . the bill seeks to do that . the bill does not in any way undermine those rights for individuals in relation to their belief about the appropriate nature of marriage . as the noble baroness , lady richardson , said , its purpose is to provide for the state to recognise equally the relationships of couples , regardless of whether they are between members of the same sex or of opposite sexes , who wish to make a loving and lifelong commitment to each other . by inserting a distinction between same-sex and opposite-sex marriage back into statute , whether by describing one as a " union " , as amendment 1 would do , or as matrimonial marriage requiring special privileges , as amendments 46 and 57 do , or by setting up a separate register , we would undermine the purpose of the act , which is to remove the distinction in law between same-sex and opposite-sex relationships . therefore , we on these benches have no sympathy with , and do not support , any of the amendments in this group . i ask noble lords not to be seduced by what i regard as the lethal combination of the noble and learned lord , lord mackay of clashfern , and the most reverend primate the archbishop of york . the way they described what they wish to achieve was seductive , but it would have the same effect on the bill .  i think that noble lords' concerns about free speech will be addressed at a later stage in committee , in the next group of amendments but one . i am certainly happy to address those concerns . this group of amendments is about the substance and purpose of this bill . the government have addressed the freedom of speech issues ; indeed , they are covered in this legislation and in the legislation that is already in existence .  my lords , i am very grateful to all noble lords . i think more than 30 noble lords have contributed to this debate on the first group of amendments . we have covered quite a lot of ground and i hope noble lords will forgive me if i start by reminding the house about the purpose of this bill . all the amendments in this group go to the heart of the bill . i acknowledge the point that my noble friend has just made and i will address his specific amendment and others in turn in a moment . the bill , in part , is about safeguarding the future of the vital institution of marriage by making sure it reflects the modern and inclusive society that this generation of your lordships' house has helped create , and which younger generations value and want to see extended . what we are looking for here is the acceptance of gay men and lesbian women for who they are . that means accepting their relationships on the same terms as we accept all relationships . i hope noble lords will forgive me if i refer back to a couple of points i made at second reading . clearly , i will not go over all the points i made then . the arrival of civil partnerships had a profound effect on how we , as a society , look at and consider gay couples . civil partnerships allowed us to see that gay men and lesbian women want to be together for exactly the same reasons as straight couples . i know some noble lords usually refer to the inability of gay couples to procreate as a way of saying that there must be a difference there because there is a physical difference . however , as other noble lords have said today and in other debates , that is not a fair distinction . there are couples of the opposite sex for whom procreation is not an option . the longer george clooney waits to pop the question , the less likely it is that that might be an option for me . if he were ever to extend his hand in marriage to me , i would not want noble lords to diminish my union with him on the basis that procreation was not a possibility . we understand that gay couples take their union - i use that word in the broadest sense , rather than specifically in response to the noble lord , lord hylton - as seriously as a man and a woman who want to get married . that is why we have become accepting of them and , for many of us , why we are so comfortable with the idea of gay couples marrying just like the rest of us . i know many noble lords have said today that there is a minority - some describe it as a majority - outside this house , and indeed there are some inside this house , who do not feel so comfortable . of course i understand that . however , the evidence shows that the majority of people are quite content for marriage to be extended to gay couples . it is worth reminding ourselves of the speech that my noble friend lord norton of louth made towards the end of second reading , when he went through all the various evidence out there . he made the very striking point that among the younger generation there is very high support for and acceptance of gay marriage . it is also worth reminding ourselves that we can see that gay men and women do not want to change marriage . they just want to be part of something that they , too , believe is important to our society . in terms of the current legislation and civil partnerships , if someone asks a gay man or a lesbian woman whether they are married , to be really accurate they have to say , " sort of " . they are not legally married , yet they want to be able to say yes . as my noble friend lord black made clear , as did the noble lord , lord carlile , this is very important .  the most reverend primate the archbishop of york outlined very powerfully his belief in marriage . i welcome him back to your lordships' house . in response to him and to all noble lords , it is important to say that it is vital that religious faiths remain free to practise in accordance with their doctrines . if , for them , that means that marriage is between a man and a woman , that is their fundamental right and the bill does not change that . it is vital that people can believe that marriage should be between a man and a woman and be able to say that that is what they believe . again , the bill allows that , but in allowing gay men and lesbian couples to be married in civil ceremonies or by those religious faiths who choose to , the government are clear that it is not right to distinguish between their status as married from that of marriages between a man and a woman . all of these amendments would create a distinction , a different tier or a separate institution , and that is contrary to what this bill seeks to achieve . i turn first to amendment 1 in the names of the noble lord , lord hylton , and my noble friend lord cormack . this has been commented on by several noble lords . it goes to the heart of the government's policy intention in the bill . it amends the first word in the first line so that a new institution of " union " would be created for same-sex couples . we disagree with that on principle but i note that it has attracted limited support from around the house . amendment 2 , in the name of my noble and learned friend lord mackay of clashfern , while apparently less stark , has a similar intention of creating a subdivision of marriage by referring to " marriage (same-sex couples) " as a separate concept . my noble and learned friend argued that this distinction is necessary because until now marriage has been between a man and a woman only . my noble friend lord dobbs made the important point that the reason why marriage has been able to be only between a man and a woman until now is that the law has not allowed otherwise and because of the way in which we have considered gay people . i will return to my noble friend's other amendments on the effect of terms in law because that comes a bit later . we do not agree that extending marriage to same-sex couples requires a separate distinction or institution for them . there is only one institution of marriage . there is no middle way in this matter . we cannot bridge this divide - we can only remove it . we do not want to construct a new institution for same-sex couples , even a new institution that uses the word " marriage " . it would still be a difference for same-sex couples , and that is exactly what this government are trying to avoid and to change through this bill .  if anybody wished to table an amendment and your lordships wanted to debate it , i would be happy to consider that debate and respond to it . however , the short answer is that it would not be acceptable because we want only one institution of marriage . that is what we are seeking to achieve . we do not want to distinguish between opposite-sex couples and same-sex couples .  i think my noble and learned friend referred to this point in an earlier intervention . i will probably cover it a little later , but i think he is referring to clause 11(1) , which states : " in the law of england and wales , marriage has the same effect in relation to same sex couples as it has in relation to opposite sex couples " . that does not introduce a distinction between two different kinds of marriage . as i understood the noble lord , lord dear , to say , amendment 9 in his name is intended to define the marriage of a man and a woman as a traditional marriage , and have that marriage registered as such by the registrar general in a separate register . traditional marriage of the type he is putting forward could be formed only by opposite-sex couples . therefore , this amendment would create an unwelcome distinction in the institution of marriage . as i stated at second reading , the introduction of same-sex marriage does not redefine any existing or future marriage of a man and a woman . it is not necessary to protect that status .  although i understand perfectly what the noble lord is saying , the amendment would still create that separation and distinction that somehow one group is different from another and , therefore , we have to keep them apart . that is what we are trying to avoid . that is what we do not want to do . amendments 33 and 34 give us an opportunity to discuss -   i shall certainly seek advice on that , but i have a feeling that my noble friend would be able to help me answer the question he has posed . i will certainly endeavour to respond to that point while i remain on my feet . amendments 33 and 34 give us an opportunity to discuss clause 11 . it may be helpful if i explain briefly what clause 11 does . it is a significant clause to ensure that existing and future legislation in england and wales will be interpreted so that all references to marriage and related terms will be read as applying equally to same-sex married couples unless specifically provided otherwise . this is right and necessary to ensure that all married couples are treated generally in the same way . the clause also gives effect to schedule 3 , which makes further provision for the interpretation of references to marriage in both new and existing legislation in england and wales . it also gives effect to schedule 4 , which sets out particular instances where the effect of clause 11 would give the wrong result . i turn to amendment 33 -   absolutely not . i was going to come on to respond briefly to the points that my noble friend raised . however , i am happy to make clear now that i will move an amendment to make it absolutely clear that that is not the case - not that it would have been anyway , but i am happy to clarify that . furthermore , nothing in the bill prevents anybody using any kind of terminology they choose to use in the course of their conversations , whether in public or private . the government seek to ensure that we do not introduce distinctive terms into this legislation which separate out different people . that is the key difference . amendment 33 in the name of my noble and learned friend lord mackay states that clause 11 should be : " subject to the later provisions of this act " . however , as i said , clause 11 gives effect to schedule 4 , paragraph 27(2)(a) of which makes clause 11 subject to contrary provision made by , " the other provisions of this act " . that achieves the effect that my noble and learned friend's amendment appears to seek and so renders it unnecessary . my noble and learned friend also referred to the presumption of parenthood and to adultery and raised important points about both those matters . we shall discuss later amendments on these issues so it is probably more efficient for me to come back to those at the appropriate time . as i have just said , we believe that amendment 34 in the name of my noble friend lord mawhinney is unnecessary . although we reject any designation that would create two tiers of marriage because there is only one form of marriage , clause 11 does nothing to prevent anybody using any terms , including " traditional marriage " or " same-sex marriage " , if they choose to do so . as i have described , the clause interprets terms related to marriage for legal purposes ; it does not prevent individuals or others making reference to , or supporting , traditional marriage . it is worth referring to the powerful intervention by my noble friend lady noakes on difference and the fact that there is a lot of difference in marriages , as other noble lords have said . some married people have no children , some stay married for life and others divorce . we do not apply different labels to those kinds of marriages and that is not something that we want to do in the bill .  there are safeguards in the bill as the equality act makes it clear that it is possible for people to express their religious or other beliefs in a manner that is absolutely of their choosing as long as that is done without inciting hatred or is not expressed in the workplace in a way that might damage an employer's reputation . however , given that we shall come to a large group of amendments on this issue , and there is quite a lot that i can say at that point which i think will reassure my noble friend , i hope she will allow me to respond to that issue in more detail on that later group of amendments . i think that would be the best thing for me to do . the amendments tabled by the noble lord , lord armstrong of ilminster , proposed that marriages for opposite-sex couples be classified as " matrimonial " marriages - again creating , i would argue , separate institutions for marriage of opposite-sex and same-sex couples . others have commented on that word " matrimonial " , which does not seem to have attracted a great deal of support around the house . for us , again , as a matter of principle , that is something that we would be unable to accept . i know that the noble lord is genuinely concerned that the current law on marriage might alter as it applies to opposite-sex couples when this bill comes into force , but i can assure him that this is not the case . the government do not believe that any new legal status or subdivision for marriage is either necessary or right . there is one legal institution of marriage in england and wales , which , through this bill , all couples will be able to join by either a religious or a civil ceremony . the existence of marriage for same-sex couples does not alter the marriage of opposite-sex couples . nothing in this bill affects the marriage of opposite-sex couples in any way . regrettably , these amendments would deny same-sex couples the fairness that this bill is designed to achieve . i therefore ask the noble lords not to press their amendments . i repeat to noble lords concerned about freedom of expression and freedom of speech matters that this bill most clearly protects freedom of speech and freedom of expression .  the most reverend primate referred to divorce and annulment . we are not changing the definition of " annulment " because it is an historical definition that is linked to procreation . as i said at second reading and again today , clearly there is a distinction between same-sex couples and opposite-sex couples because procreation is not available to same-sex couples . we are not seeking to change the definition of existing marriage law and how it applies to opposite-sex couples . we think it is perfectly proper for that distinction to remain as it is and not be changed in order to apply to same-sex couples , because that would render it meaningless .  again , amendments on adultery are coming up . i do not know whether we will get to them today . i am really looking forward to that debate . it is going to be great . i urge noble lords to come back on it . we should be selling tickets for it . i will be able to cover that issue in detail at that time .  the noble lord has done me a great service because he reminds me that i was wrong in the connection that i made to procreation . that is why it would be much safer if we debated this matter when i have the right speaking notes in front of me . i am grateful to the noble lord . i can , however , respond to the question from my noble friend lord lester . this was a us supreme court case that ended the bussing of children to segregated schools in the usa . i am wary of making a direct read-across , but my noble friend makes a point that is very worthy of consideration : that separate but equal can be a cloak of inequality . i think i have covered all the points raised in the debate , so i ask the noble lords whose amendments we have been discussing not to press them .  