my lords , having conducted some 400 weddings as a parish priest , making the journey with couples as they anticipate a lifelong commitment has been one of the great privileges of the ordained life . i have witnessed personally the stability , fulfilment and anchor for life for so many , which has been transformational . however , i have also observed that the open and public recognition of gay relationships that civil partnerships now provide displays many of the very qualities for which marriage itself is so highly celebrated . i speak as one whose respect for and appreciation of gay clergy is deep and who recognises in them sacrificial lives and fruitful ministries . i also recognise the need for some humility at this moment in speaking on matters of equality from these benches . i add my appreciation to that of the most reverend primate for the way in which the secretary of state and her colleagues have tried to accommodate the church of england's concerns at every point in this process . i entirely endorse what the noble baroness , lady kennedy , and others have said about the need to continue to make progress on the inclusion of gay people in our society , and i entirely accept what the noble lord , lord pannick , has said about change and development in our understanding of the institution of marriage . yet i cannot support the bill and , from the post bags of those of us on these benches , the reasons why are shared by many who do not hold the christian faith and by the great majority of the leaders of the other world faith traditions . i want to highlight three reasons . first , this legislation does not resolve the decades-old debate about when undeniable differences between men and women matter and when they do not . modern  political discourse tends to recognise as public goods only things that can be equally appropriated by any given individual , regardless of difference . this involves a difficulty in entertaining notions of public rights and obligations that might pertain to one sex rather than the other , or to one sexual orientation rather than another . as professor john milbank has written in a paper for the respublica think tank : " the risk of this exclusive focus on individual rights is that the needs and capacities of people in their specific differences , which may be either naturally given or the result of cultural association , tend to be overridden . and so it is that injustice can arise in the name of justice " . i could not help noticing in the debate in this house on international women's day the underlying assumption that women bring a special quality to the public square and that the complementarity of men and women is what enriches and stabilises society . yet , in the realm of public discourse , assertion of sexual difference in relation to marriage has become practically unspeakable , in spite of the fact that it is implicitly assumed by most people in the course of everyday life . equal marriage will bring to an end the one major social institution that enshrines that complementarity . secondly , the bill , introduced in haste , has not allowed enough time for a weighing of gains and losses to the well-being of society . do the gains of meeting the need of many lgbt people for the dignity and equality that identifying their partnerships as marriage gives outweigh the loss entailed as society moves away from a clear understanding of marriage as a desirable setting within which children are conceived and raised ? in traditional christian societies , the price you pay for getting married is , in principle , a heavy one - sexual fidelity till death us do part and , for some , a responsibility for the socialising and educating of children . as the respublica paper on this subject pointed out : " as people become more and more reluctant to pay that price , so do weddings become more and more provisional , and the distinction between the socially endorsed union and the merely private arrangement becomes less and less absolute and less and less secure " . as sociologists regularly observe , this gain in freedom for one generation may imply a loss for the next . regardless of the best intentions of advocates of equality , if we detach the procreation of children as being one of the core purposes of marriage , then no social institution enshrines that purpose for the generations ahead . this is not , of course , to say that those who cannot or do not wish to have children are any less married . thirdly , as others have said , there is a difficulty here in the use of language . put simply , there are two competing ideas of marriage at play in this debate . the first is perhaps traditional and conjugal , and extends beyond the individuals who marry to the children they hope to create and to the society they wish to shape . the second is more privative , and is to do with a relationship abstracted from the wider concern that marriage was originally designed to speak to . as the most reverend primate has pointed out , this category error lies at the heart of this bill as drafted . in deciding whether to give this bill a second reading , i have to ask myself several questions . is it clear that it will produce public goods for our society  that outweigh the loss of understanding of marriage as we have known it ? has the debate in the country and in parliament been conducted in a way that will enable our society to adapt wisely to a fundamental social change ? at a time of extreme social pressure , is this innovation likely to create a more cohesive , settled and unified society ? lastly , at this stage , is it appropriate to frustrate the clear will of the commons on this bill ? i have concluded that the answer to all these questions must be no and therefore , if it is the unusual intention of this house to divide at second reading , i shall have no alternative but to abstain .  my lords , the noble lord , lord tebbit , asked some very ingenious and challenging questions , and i know that i am not alone in looking forward very much to the minister's response to them .  irrespective of my views on this subject , to which i will come in a moment , i congratulate the noble lord , lord dear , on taking time and trouble , and displaying considerable courage , in bringing forward the amendment and arguing for it extremely well . by doing so , he has , at the very least , ensured that today's debate is a great deal more serious and intense than it would have been if the result had been a foregone conclusion .  i may be the first speaker who has deliberately refrained from taking a decision on how i will vote tomorrow until i have heard the debate . incidentally , i share the view that the government's conduct on this bill has been pretty unedifying . in my view , it should have been brought in as a private member's bill . it has nothing to do with party politics or the governance of the state and was not mentioned in any manifesto . the consultation exercise was clearly perfunctory , to say the least , and may have been dishonest and falsified if it is true - i pray that it is not - that a petition of half a million people was counted as the expression of one view . that is the sort of legalistic trickery one normally associates with putin's russia , and it would be very deplorable if it has happened here . nevertheless , these are not the essential points on which we will vote .  i shall certainly vote as i do not believe in abstention . i am minded to vote for the bill on the basis of two principles by which i always try to be guided . one is the liberty principle , first explicitly formulated by mill , which was referred to by the noble lord , lord dear , in his introductory speech . it states that in a free society the state does not attempt to constrain the liberty of the citizen beyond the minimum point required to defend the liberty of others . therefore , if you have two potential partners to a marriage or any other ceremony and someone willing to perform the ceremony , be he or she a priest , a minister of religion , a registrar or whoever , what right does the state have to prevent that taking place ? that is a very pertinent and relevant consideration .  the other principle that i always try to be guided by is the pareto principle , which says that in any structure of social relationships , whether or not enshrined in the law , if a change can be made such that even just one person is happier and no one is made less happy , that change should automatically be made . it seems to me that if we enact this bill , we will make an awful lot of people very happy . some say that it will make some people unhappy , but i do not accept that that is the equivalent emotion . the noble lord , lord tebbit , and some other distinguished noble lords who have spoken this evening , disapprove of what is going on , but disapproval is not quite the same thing . their own particular liberties , their own interests and their own utility are not impacted , so i do not think that that is relevant .  i am minded , broadly speaking , to vote for this bill , but i have two very serious reservations that i will put to the minister . one of these , thank god , has been raised by many noble lords this evening , and i will add to the list of those who have emphasised it . the other has not been mentioned at all . the one that has been mentioned is the fate of people who might lose their jobs as a result of this bill being enacted . we should all be extremely concerned about that . what about registrars , whom no one has mentioned ? as i read the bill , registrars , unlike priests and ministers of religion , will not have the opportunity to opt out . are they all going to be fired ? are they going to be compensated ? is a decent effort going to be made to find them another decent job ? we need to know . we cannot possibly allow this bill to go on the statute book without having an answer to those questions .  what about teachers ? i also read the legal counsel's opinion to which the noble lord , lord dear , referred , so i need not summarise it . it states , very persuasively , that there is all too great a danger that teachers will lose their jobs if they continue to express the view that the proper concept of marriage is the traditional one , as we understand it . the noble baroness , lady stowell , went a long way to meeting me - and , indeed , the house - on this in her remarks from the front bench when she said that the government intended that there should be effective protections and were prepared to strengthen the bill to make sure that those protections were more effective . the government were not prepared to accept amendments in the other place , but i took it that there would be a greater degree of flexibility , perhaps as a result of this debate and of the reaction in the country . if that is the case , i welcome it . if the bill goes forward , i shall certainly refer to the earlier assurance from the noble baroness , lady stowell , which will be very relevant to proceedings in committee and on report .  the other reservation and concern on which i must be satisfied if i am going to vote against the amendment and for second reading relates to the issue of legal blackmail . it is all too possible that , even if the law is totally robust , a teacher or a priest who has tried to opt out , or somebody else who is , or should be , protected under the bill , may be attacked at law by a possibly aggressive gay rights organisation . the case may go up through the courts to the supreme court , even to the european court of human rights in strasbourg , where ultimately the protections will prove to be robust and effective . however , how can a poor individual citizen possibly face a movement with millions of pounds to spend on lawyers who would certainly not , in this case , be working on a contingency or conditional fee basis ? this thing could go on for years , running up millions of pounds and totally disrupting the life of the plaintiff - or defendant , depending on whether it was a civil or criminal action , though from a practical point of view the result would be very similar . we must be assured that would not happen . who would pay the legal fees in the case of a priest in the church of england or another church ? churches' money should not be spent on defending a person finding himself in that position . someone earning £15 ,000 a year cannot be expected to find millions of pounds to pursue his own defence . i would need a robust answer to that question before i would be prepared to support the bill .  my lords , when the civil partnership legislation came to your lordships' house , i spoke strongly in favour of it . if it came again because there was a need for further protections or development of the legislation , i would continue to speak very strongly and passionately for it . however , i am not speaking from the place i normally sit as convenor because my views about this legislation vary from those of the overwhelming majority of my colleagues on these benches . it is right to make it clear that i take a different view and that i am not persuaded of the virtues of this piece of legislation .  i am hesitant to speak because many of those who have spoken , and many outside , feel very passionately and sensitively about these things , and i have listened carefully to my noble friend lady barker , the noble lords , lord smith of finsbury and lord black of brentwood , and others who have spoken strongly of their personal experience and their strong feelings and sense of hurt at times . however , others have spoken crisply and i have been sent e-mails by leaders of some campaigns advising me that any opposition to the bill can be based only on homophobia . that is as unhelpful and unfortunate as extremism on the other side .  it is important for us to consider what is being proposed . no one disputes that it is a major change , and it is for the proponents of change to make their argument persuasively , not the reverse . i am not opposed to change , and the noble baroness , lady neuberger , pointed out that there have been many changes in the institution of marriage over the years . at other times , she said , polygamy was possible . she could also have said , " and currently in other places " . in our part of the world it is illegal . the age of consent for marriage has not been the same at all times , nor has it always moved in one direction .  the noble lord , lord blair of boughton , was not correct when he said that the tide of history flows always in one direction - would that it were so . in many parts of the world it is flowing in a very different direction and that is one of the great dangers of which we must be aware when we espouse social change of a major order . my noble friend lord lothian made the point - and i share many of his concerns about conflict in various parts of the world - that if one does not take the people with one in a social change , one can actually provoke reaction against it . i give one example : i am a member of the presbyterian church in ireland and it is clear that there is a stream against continuing with the ordination of women , which we have had since 1927 . it is not at all impossible that it might be reversed ; it was reversed some years ago in the presbyterian church in australia . therefore , the tide of history does not always flow in one direction , and it can be greatly disadvantageous .  the question is : what does the community want ? the electorate are often much more fickle , saying one thing now and a very different thing a little while later . have the government made the argument ? my noble friend lady stowell of beeston made a thoughtful speech . i noted that she said , near the end , that quite simply the love and relationship are the same and therefore should be included in marriage . i had not even finished noting it down before she said that of course the relationships were different . both statements cannot be entirely true . in a way , her jest - sometimes the truth is spoken in jest , and she mentioned george clooney - said a lot because it pointed out that the thought of marriage is for many people about merely a sense of attraction , the wish to be with a person and the wish for that to be permanent . there was not much sense of looking at the other components of marriage that are also important but are not necessarily a part of civil partnership . the bringing into being of children , nurturing them and bringing them up are not things of little importance .  it is therefore important to persuade , and i am not persuaded that the talk of equality is not being mistaken for sameness in the minds of some people . yet the truth is that equality is about recognising difference , diversity and treating people fairly , not trying to ensure that everyone fits into the same institution . the bill will not achieve what it is said to achieve for gay christians who wish to solemnise their marriage in churches . it will not happen unless what happens is similar to what the noble lord , lord smith of finsbury , referred to when he talked about those who had spoken in favour of civil partnerships having changed their minds about whether they were going to press for same-sex marriage . could it be that we find ourselves returning to this issue again in this house in debate and in legislation because , once achieved , there would be unhappiness that all the main churches were still not prepared to accept this matter ? unless one was a quaker , liberal jew or unitarian , it still would not be possible to solemnise a marriage in a church . would we return to the issue ? i fear that we would do so again and again . the arguments must be clear , thoughtful and robust . this is not the only issue of equality whereby the notions of sameness and uniformity seem to have grasped people and they no longer understand equality in any other way .  my time has gone - those who know me well know that i can speak at substantial length on anything i care passionately about . i speak not as one who is unpersuadable , nor as one who stands in the way of change if it is clearly thought through and reflected upon , but as one who genuinely feels that sometimes what appears to be a progressive move can trigger quite the opposite . we must tread carefully , thoughtfully and reflectively to ensure that we make real progress for all concerned and for our society as a whole . a lot has been said about individuals but this is a social institution for society as a whole and it must be thought through in that context .  i shall continue to listen and to think . i suspect that i shall not feel able to support the bill , but neither shall i feel able to support the amendment of the noble lord , lord dear , because i believe that , the elected house having spoken , it is our job to consider , reflect and debate upon the bill in public where our society may see it , and in that way contribute to the further discussion of the bill .  my lords , like many of your lordships , i am thoroughly unhappy with this bill . bearing in mind the large number of speakers on this matter , i shall be brief . in my 32 years in your lordships' house - i am sure i do not look that old - i have never experienced such a large mailbag as i have had on this bill , not even for the hunting bill . i have had only nine letters in favour of this bill but those letters were written with sincerity - i have no doubt in believing that . each one was completely different and had a balanced and lucid argument . the letters against the bill were nearly all virtually identical .  i really have struggled with this issue . at first i would have followed the noble lord , lord dear , into the lobby , should he press his amendment to a vote , but two further matters occurred to me . first , your lordships sit here in this highly privileged position to hold the government to account , to look at legislation and to improve it where necessary , bearing in mind always that the convention is that the elected house - the other place - should prevail over the unelected chamber . this is a matter of considerable constitutional importance . it is the way in which we make democratic decisions . i have personal experience of wrecking two bills at second reading - it was enormous fun - the boxing bill and the late lord diamond's peerage bill , but they were both private members' bills and they were fair game . this is a major government bill . we should at least give it a second reading . if we do not , we will deserve to be targeted by the critics and opponents of our very existence and that of this house . our task is to improve this bill , no matter how imperfect and unsatisfactory we believe it to be , by amendment and balanced argument on its passage through this house . secondly , i have listened to the views of many young people , the majority of whom i believe do not consider this bill to be an issue . on the television programme " question time " recently , support for this bill by young people was clearly demonstrated . those young people are the next generation . we should listen to them and take their views into account . they have a completely different view of homosexuality and a high degree of toleration for what to many of my age is the elephant in the room . i can quite understand homosexuality as a fact of everyday life , but i find it extremely difficult to accept it as the norm . that is the way that i think - that is me . however , an awful lot of water has flowed under the bridge in the many years that i have been privileged to spend in your lordships' house , and things in society have changed vastly over that time . all these matters will continue to change . that is life - that is the way that things go on .  in opposing this bill , i believe that i should be legislating for the lives of those of a younger generation who will have to live with the consequences of my actions , and i do not feel comfortable with that . however , when the prime minister and mr clegg refer to this bill as being a move to create equality , i really object . heterosexual couples who choose not to be married to one another for their own reasons should be able to join in a civil partnership , should they so wish , and as civil partners they should be able to enjoy all the same financial and legal benefits as those in same-sex civil partnerships or , should this bill become law , same-sex marriages . that would be equality .  finally , i have the utmost respect for the noble lord , lord dear , and i congratulate him on his tenacity . however , i can neither support nor oppose him , and i shall abstain on his amendment .  my lords , this legislation brings into sharp focus the role of another important institution in our society - the state . it is an actor on this stage , promoting a view of marriage , so it has a high duty to get the statutory framework correct so that it preserves or actually encourages dissenting views in the national and local public square . for many years , the public square did not allow debate on immigration ; any dissenters were racists and shut out . such silence brings , at best , outward conformity , and led , i think , to more people walking past my flat on saturday for the edl than would have done if there had been a free debate . any member's inbox will show how divisive this issue has become , and how strongly held the views are , but the public square is again in danger of being shut down . dissenters are often automatically bigots or homophobic - or like the state of alabama making rosa parks give up her seat on the bus . that is a false analogy - and that racism label again , but in a way that it would take more than a soundbite to distinguish .  many gay people do not support same sex marriage . are they homophobic ? it is interesting to look at the exchanges in the other place between two highly respected members of parliament , mr burrowes and mr lammy , with mr lammy using a slave owner analogy and the ultimately mild-mannered mr burrowes saying that this argument was pernicious , offensive and playing the race card . clearly , we cannot leave the average bobby to police this on our streets without further guidance , so this house will need to consider carefully amendments on free speech that the government conceded were needed in the other place . until these concessions , the government argued that this bill merely concerns the conduct of the ceremony itself . but legislation affects culture , debate and even atmosphere . section 28 of the local government act reflected a state view on marriage , and the gay community complained that the effect went much further than the words of the statute - and so it could be with this statute .  the state should have a view , but not a required orthodoxy . healthy societies have pluralistic public spaces , and i have yet to come across a gay person who disagrees with this . we need to disagree without being disagreeable . whether this statute adequately protects religious freedoms brings up some of the interesting legal questions at the cutting edge of jurisprudence , and lawyers are lining up on either side of this debate . the protections must work , because religious people are not going away . i hope that i have been wrong in detecting something of an attitude that soon the church of england and other religious groups will get with the programme and soon just join in with all the bill . as the noble lord , lord alderdice , so eloquently stated , we cannot often predict the winds of change . this may well prove to be a moment when we look back and see that the anglican church put its stake in the sand in relation to marriage , and we do not know where the views will end up in 40 years' time . i want to put on public record that i appreciate the stance that the church of england has taken .  it is interesting to note that western europe has been out of step over the past 50 years with the rest of the globe . the rest of the globe got seriously more religious . if south korea can go from about 0% christians to more than 50% christians in 100 years , and i look at the renewed leadership of the anglican church , i am optimistic . but even if the noble lord , lord pannick , is correct that the strasbourg court will not compel a religious organisation to conduct a same sex marriage , is that all religious groups can hope for - mere non-compulsion ? if a small temple is denied local authority grants for its youth group due to its views on same-sex marriage , it should switch money from the food bank to legal fees to sue for direct or indirect discrimination . no , my lords . this house should put in the bill the onus on the state not to treat people detrimentally or less favourably and not leave it to the citizen or charities to have to go to court .  finally , i will speak about my role here today . the complaint that this bill was not in a manifesto has caused me to remember that the public did not vote for me ; and at this moment i am actually grateful , standing as a conservative , for that fact . i cannot be held to account by those who support the bill . the people's representatives in the other place had a free vote and voted overwhelmingly for this bill . it badly needs amending . it needs this chamber to do what it does best and improve and scrutinise legislation . the religious groups are not , i am afraid , generally content with this bill , as my noble friend the minister stated . the catholics , black-led churches and other faiths , who believe that now they could be in an even more vulnerable position than the anglican church , need us to do our job . if this vote defeats the bill , it will probably return next year , and we risk the commons using the parliament act . in those circumstances this flawed bill , as it stands now , would become law . do i want to vote against this bill ? yes . should i ? no .  my lords , i am pathetically open-minded about many aspects of this bill . i have studied with great care the arguments put forward on both sides of the debate , although you cannot really talk in terms of a single debate with such a complex measure . i have been immensely impressed , as i am sure we all have , by the quality of today's debate , and the sincerity of the contributions made by all who have spoken . i have been particularly touched and moved , intellectually and emotionally , by the personal testimonies of my noble friend lady barker and the noble lords , lord smith of finsbury , lord browne of madingley and lord black of brentwood . i confess that my contribution tonight is not going to be sharp-edged and decisive , although i do have one proposal to make . i am going to speak very much in the hope that there may be reactions from your lordships to it .  first , however , i have to join others in saying that although the prime minister has shown real courage in bringing forward this bill , the way in which it has been brought forward and the conduct so far have been woefully inadequate . if there was ever a measure in which the general public should have felt part of our debates and our deliberations , this is it . this is not our issue . this is pre-eminently an issue for all the people of this country , whatever their views , whatever their background , wherever they live , whatever they do . there has been a lamentable failure to engage them . as the noble lord , lord dear , said in his opening speech , the way in which responses have been measured , with petitions , however large - he mentioned one of half a million signatories - being treated as a single contribution really beggars belief , and one wonders why it was done .  in the same way , the gauging of public opinion by opinion polls is not sufficient . we have not had a deliberative document , a green paper - call it what you will - that can be distributed far and wide in order to elicit the mature views of our fellow citizens . i am a little suspicious of the figures that have emerged through the opinion polls , although i accept - and indeed it is my point - that most young people tend to think that this is a no-brainer , that of course those of the same sex should be able to marry ; but it is possible to say that young people are not so much tolerant as indifferent to some of these issues . the sexual mores of our very young adults and late teenagers are staggeringly different from those which prevailed when most of us were their age . i suspect that many of those young people would say off the top of their heads , " of course , marriage for everybody " . when they actually become married themselves they will mature into a different mindset , but that is by the bye .  i have to say to the noble lord , lord dear , that i cannot accept his proposal , particularly in terms of the constitutional arrangements with the other place . i do not think it would be right for us to seek to jettison this bill at this stage . however , if we proceed as we are presently doing , there is the risk of a backlash . my noble friend lord alderdice has referred to this . there is a real risk that of the very many - i would say millions - of our fellow citizens who feel strongly about this measure , most of them feel strongly against the change . one cannot judge this by one's own mailbag , but from the comments made in the debate , it seems that most noble lords have received a disproportionately large number of letters and e-mails from those who are very concerned about what we are up to .  i do not want that . i would rather we emerge at the end of this process with an act of parliament that has general consent and does not risk a backlash in the manner seen in france or anywhere else . it should heal and reconcile the differences of opinion and , in particular , the extremes of opinion . there is some homophobia in our society , although thank goodness it is vastly less than we experienced in our youth . at the other end there is , i fear , a sort of phobia against those who do not take a totally liberal view of the homosexual position .  i put forward my proposal tentatively and in a genuine spirit of reconciliation . we should think of using a different word or title for a homosexual union from that of a heterosexual union ; in effect , not to call the union of a same-sex couple a marriage but , i suggest - it is only a suggestion - an espousal . the noun that derives from that word is spouse , which is gender-neutral . i think that it would lance a boil in the public mind as to what we are seeking to do , bearing in mind that everything else in the bill will remain unchanged . all the rights will be the same .  i am tempted to say that those who talk about equality of esteem , as i do - my goodness , if there is one thing that i live by in my politics , it is the equal worth of every human being and the equal esteem in which they have the right to be held - that to some extent it is a misnomer to talk about a same-sex union in exactly the same way as that of a different-sex union . that is because of two fundamental , factual , inescapable and ineluctable differences which have been referred to by other noble lords . the first is the nature of the union and the second is the procreative potential . it is no good saying that lots of people who get married are too old to have children , do not want children or whatever . the fact of the matter is that most people who marry seek to have children and do so . same-sex couples in their civil marriages cannot have children except , of course , through adoption , surrogacy or whatever . that is fundamentally different . it is not better or worse but it is fundamentally different . i do not see why we should not face that . it is a form of honesty that would inure to the benefit of same-sex couples in the long run .  that is my late-night thought . i hope that noble lords will give me some of theirs before committee so that i can decide whether or not to table an amendment .  my lords , i have also given notice that i wish to speak in the gap and gave notice , and shall do so briefly in view of the length of the debate . i did not put my name down at the beginning , because frankly i did not know what i thought about this difficult legislation . i still have great difficulty with this bill , though i have greatly benefited from the extraordinary quality of the debate . marriage is certainly much more than a wedding . as the noble baroness , lady o 'loan , pointed out , it has huge ramifications that have not been explored . how could they have been explored in the other place , given the bulldozer that applied ? i entirely agree with what my noble friend has just said about the process to which this important legislation has been subjected . i come , however , to a different conclusion about what this house should do about it . it would not be wise for us to reject this legislation at second reading . we have a duty and the right to take it through committee . that is our function . i beg the front bench and the usual channels to afford us more than two days in committee . if we reject the bill now , it is a perversion of the function of this house , so i hope and expect that there will be more days available for discussion , given the extraordinary ramifications of this legislation . we need to know that the safeguards that have been claimed are robust . we need to know that the sorts of issues that have been raised can be pinned down and that we have definitions . we may call this thing marriage , but there will be two different categories , and we have to be clear about what the legal position is . i do not support the bill as it stands , but i will not oppose it going to committee .  i wish i was speaking on behalf of the church of england . i am not . i am part of it . the noble baroness knows as well as i do that decisions about liturgy and constitutions are not the privilege of bishops but of the general synod of the church of england . this matter will need to be discussed . incidentally , i am one of those who has gone on record as saying that had civil partnerships been given enough space , the church would not have escaped the possibility of a conversation . the challenge the church of england would have faced is this , what do you do with people who are committed christians in same-sex loving relationships ? would you rather bless a ship and a tree , and not them ? however , that is a big question , to which we are going to come . i am afraid that now is not the moment . we are dealing with the legislation as we have it . i am trying to make it slightly easier to work out what that difference is . give me time , and one day i may come back and speak on this .  my lords , it seems to me that we are trying to find a form of words that does not increase the level of discrimination . the amendment in the name of my noble and learned friend lord mackay offers that and i shall be most interested to hear what my noble friend on the front bench has to say about it . it seems to me that it could provide a way forward without producing further discrimination . i believe that if we added the words " traditional marriage " to the bill , we would be going down entirely the wrong route . what is the definition of " traditional marriage " ? how do we describe it ? is it when the bride wears white ? is it a traditional marriage when the bride goes up the aisle with two children whom she has already had out of wedlock ? we would be going down a road that , as legislators , we should not follow , and i believe that it would be a grave mistake . we should find a form of words that both sides can live with .