i share a great many views that the noble marquess has expressed . however , he and i came from the house of commons . does he not feel that when the other house passes legislation , it is perhaps wrong for us to reject it at second reading , and that we should go into committee and discuss how the matter can be looked at ?  perhaps my noble friend will forgive me if i raise one point with him . have there not been numerous occasions when this house , even when it was largely hereditary , rejected bills that had come here from the house of commons on second reading ? i have a big memory of the war crimes bill that came here from the house of commons having been passed there by an almighty majority , far greater that the majority given to this bill in the house of commons . nobody in this place suggested that anyone would be behaving improperly if that bill was rejected by this house . what has changed ?  i think that my noble friend exaggerates when he says that there have been numerous examples . there have been examples , of course , mainly of private members ' bills being defeated at second reading when they were being put forward by noble lords in this house , but that is a different matter . i also draw my noble friend 's attention to the fact that bills like the one to which he refers , the war crimes bill , have nevertheless become law without the house of lords being able to contribute through a committee stage to the detailed provisions of it . we have had numerous references in the debate to matters that require further discussion but by definition , if the parliament act is used , it is the bill as it stands that becomes law in those cases .  may i correct my noble friend ? the bill that is sent back from the house of commons in its original form comes to this house in the next session . it is then open to this house either to reject it again and it goes on the statute book as it is in its present state , or to take it through all its usual stages and for it be amended by this house in the normal way .   oh !  clearly , the noble baroness has the answer to all questions and is going to tell me the answer to the question that i asked about the heir to the throne .  is that not discriminatory ?  there was a long discussion about the vote in the house of commons being an all-party vote . i spent nearly 37 years there , and i know what is euphemistically called an all-party vote . i want my noble friend to assure the house tonight that when we are having a free vote in this house , it will be a genuinely free vote so far as the conservative members of this house are concerned , including front-bench members .  of course . i am pleased to confirm that to my noble friend .  since the noble lord thinks there is not a jot of evidence that marriage will be strengthened by this bill , what evidence does he have - apart from his assertion - that this bill will put people off getting married ?  if we are repeating second reading speeches , the noble lord knows that at the same time that same-sex marriage was introduced in spain , the divorce laws were liberalised . that is what led to the decline in marriage , not the introduction of same-sex marriage .  will the noble lord , on reconsideration , delete " lower status " and just say " different status " ?  will the noble lord at some stage address the amendment of the noble and learned lord , lord mackay of clashfern ? it is difficult to believe that his proposal for " marriage (same-sex couples) " could import a lower standard , because it includes the word " marriage " .  i may not be able to do that because i still have to deal with these amendments , so i will reflect on that .  it is in the same group of amendments .  perhaps my noble friend might refer back to what the noble and learned baroness , lady butler-sloss , asked him , which was whether he objects to amendment 46 , in the name of the noble lord , lord armstrong of ilminster , which would give the term " matrimony " to a marriage between a man and a woman but would allow marriage to same-sex couples .  my lords -   my lords , my noble friend will have heard the exception taken by a number of our noble friends and others to the term " traditional marriage " . the term " same-sex marriage " immediately identifies what the difference is . however , there are two well known terms in the history of the church of england which do not carry any such connotations , each of which i think might appeal especially to the predilections of the two confronted parties - that is , " ancient " and " modern " . i do not know whether he would consider changing his proposed two terms at a later stage ; i just put that in his mind .  my lords , the noble baroness , lady turner , wished to speak but could not get up fast enough .  oh !  a curious aspect of this debate is that it is assumed that if there is a distinction between two possible definitions , one is necessarily inferior to the other , and that comes out very clearly . would it meet her point if there was also an amendment which said the status of both forms of marriage is equal ?  before my noble friend moves on from that point , am i not right that different terms are applied to same-sex and opposite-sex marriage at different points in the bill ?  i am grateful to the minister for giving way . will she ask her advisers why the separate but equal doctrine that is being propounded in some parts of the house was struck down by the american supreme court in brown v board of education as being inherently discriminatory ?  will my noble friend the minister clarify the position on annulment ? this matter appeared in a letter written to peers . my understanding of annulment is that it is not connected to procreation . you can have an annulment of a marriage even if you get married at 65 . it is not directly related to procreation .